# HOW TO TALK ABOUT PERSONALITY TYPES

## TEASER PREVIEW

What word best describes your personality if you:
- *are interested solely in your own welfare?*
- *constantly talk about yourself?*
- *dedicate your life to helping others?*
- *turn your mind inward?*
- *turn your mind outward?*
- *hate humanity?*
- *hate women?*
- *hate marriage?*
- *lead a lonely, austere existence?*

## SESSION 1
Every human being is, in one way or another, unique.

Everyone’s personality is determined by a combination of genetic and environmental factors.

Let us examine ten personality types (one of which might by chance be your very own) that result from the way culture, growth, family background, and environment interact with heredity.

And, of course, we begin not with the words, but with the ideas.

### IDEAS

#### 1. me first
Your attitude to life is simple, direct, and aboveboard—every decision you make is based on the answer to one question: “What’s in it for me?” If your selfishness, greed, and ruthless desire for self-advancement hurt other people, that’s too bad. “This is a tough world, pal, dog eat dog and all that, and I, for one, am not going to be left behind!”

An *egoist*

#### 2. the height of conceit
“Now, let’s see. Have you heard about all the money I’m making? Did I tell you about my latest amorous conquest? Let me give you my opinion—I know, because I’m an expert at practically everything!” You are boastful to the point of being obnoxious—you have only one string to your conversational violin, namely, *yourself;* and on it you play a number of monotonous variations: what *you* think, what *you* have done, how good *you* are, how *you* would solve the problems of the world, etc. ad nauseam.

An *egotist*

#### 3. let me help you
You have discovered the secret of true happiness—concerning yourself with the welfare of others. Never mind your own interests, how’s the next fellow getting along?

An *altruist*

#### 4. leave me alone
Like a biochemist studying a colony of bacteria under the microscope, you minutely examine your every thought, feeling, and action. Probing, futile questions like “What do other people think of me?”, “How do I look?”, and “Maybe I shouldn’t have said that?” are your constant nagging companions, for you are unable to realize that other people do not spend as much time and energy analyzing you as you think.

You may seem unsocial, yet your greatest desire is to be liked and accepted. You may be shy and quiet, you are often moody and unhappy, and you prefer solitude or at most the company of one person to a crowd. You have an aptitude for creative work and are uncomfortable engaging in activities that require cooperation with other people. You may even be a genius, or eventually turn into one.

An *introvert*

#### 5. let’s do it together
You would be great as a teacher, counselor, administrator, insurance agent. You can always become interested—sincerely, vitally interested—in other people’s problems. You’re the life of the party, because you never worry about the effect of your actions, never inhibit yourself with doubts about dignity or propriety. You are usually happy, generally full of high spirits; you love to be with people—lots of people. Your thoughts, your interests, your whole personality are turned outward.

An *extrovert*

#### 6. neither extreme
You have both introverted and extroverted tendencies—at different times and on different occasions. Your interests are turned, in about equal proportions, both inward and outward. Indeed, you’re quite normal—in the sense that your personality is like that of most people.

An *ambivert*

#### 7. people are no damn good
Cynical, embittered, suspicious, you hate everyone. (Especially, but never to be admitted, *yourself?*) The perfectibility of the human race? “Nonsense! No way!” The stupidity, the meanness, and the crookedness of most mortals (“Most? Probably all!”)—that is your favorite theme.

A *misanthrope*

#### 8. women are no damn good
Sometime in your dim past, you were crossed, scorned, or deeply wounded by a woman (a mother, or mother figure, perhaps?). So now you have a carefully constructed defense against further hurt—you hate *all* women.

A *misogynist*

#### 9. “marriage is an institution—and who wants to live in an institution?”
You will not make the ultimate *legal* commitment. Members of the opposite sex are great as lovers, roommates, apartment- or house-sharers, but *not* as lawfully wedded spouses. The ties that bind are too binding for you. You may possibly believe, and possibly, for yourself, be right, that a commitment is deeper and more meaningful if freedom is available without judicial proceedings.

A *misogamist*

#### 10. “… that the flesh is heir to …”
Self-denial, austerity, lonely contemplation—these are the characteristics of the good life, so you claim. The simplest food and the least amount of it that will keep body and soul together, combined with abstinence from fleshly, earthly pleasures, will eventually lead to spiritual perfection—that is your philosophy.

An *ascetic*

### USING THE WORDS

You have been introduced to ten valuable words—but in each case, as you have noticed, you have first considered the ideas that these words represent. Now *say* the words—each one is respelled phonetically so that you will be sure to pronounce it correctly.[1](part0010.html#c03-ftn1)
*Say each word aloud.* This is the first important step to complete mastery. As you hear a word in your own voice, think of its meaning. Are you quite clear about it? If not, reinforce your learning by rereading the explanatory paragraph or paragraphs.

#### Can you pronounce the words?

| Word | Pronunciation |
| ---------------- | ---- |
|  1. *egoist*     |      |
| 2. *egotist*     |      |
| 3. *altruist*    |      |
| 4. *introvert*   |      |
| 5. *extrovert*   |      |
| 6. *ambivert*    |      |
| 7. *misanthrope* |      |
| 8. *misogynist*  |      |
| 9. *misogamist*  |      |
| 10. *ascetic*    |      |

#### Can you work with the words?

You have taken two long steps toward mastery of the expressive words in this chapter—you have thought about the ideas behind them, and you have said them aloud.

For your third step, match each personality with the appropriate characteristic, action, or attitude.

| 1. egoist      | a. turns thoughts inward                  |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 2. egotist     | b. hates marriage                         |
| 3. altruist    | c. talks about accomplishments            |
| 4. introvert   | d. hates people                           |
| 5. extrovert   | e. does not pursue pleasures of the flesh |
| 6. ambivert    | f. is interested in the welfare of others |
| 7. misanthrope | g. believes in self-advancement           |
| 8. misogynist  | h. turns thoughts both inward and outward |
| 9. misogamist  | i. hates women                            |
| 10. ascetic    | j. turns thoughts outward                 |
KEY: 1–g, 2–c, 3–f, 4–a, 5–j, 6–h, 7–d, 8–i, 9–b, 10–e
#### Do you understand the words?

Now that you are becoming more and more involved in these ten words, find out if they can make an immediate appeal to your understanding. Here are ten questions—can you indicate, quickly, and without reference to any previous definitions, whether the correct answer to each of these questions is *yes* or *no?*

1. Is an *egoist* selfish?<br/>YES    NO
2. Is modesty one of the characteristics of the *egotist?*<br/>YES    NO
3. Is an *altruist* selfish?<br/>YES    NO
4. Does an *introvert* pay much attention to himself?<br/>YES    NO
5. Does an *extrovert* prefer solitude to companionship?<br/>YES    NO
6. Are most normal people *ambiverts?*<br/>YES    NO
7. Does a *misanthrope* like people?<br/>YES    NO
8. Does a *misogynist* enjoy the company of women?<br/>YES    NO
9. Does an *ascetic* lead a life of luxury?<br/>YES    NO
10. Does a *misogamist* try to avoid marriage?<br/>YES    NO

KEY: 1–yes, 2–no, 3–no, 4–yes, 5–no, 6–yes, 7– no, 8–no, 9–no, 10–yes
#### Can you recall the words?

You have thus far reinforced your learning by saying the words aloud, by matching them to their definitions, and by responding to meaning when they were used in context.

Can you recall each word, now, without further reference to previous material? And can you spell it correctly?

1. Who lives a lonely, austere life?<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
2. Whose interests are turned outward?<br/>E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
3. Who is supremely selfish?<br/>E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
4. Who hates people?<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
5. Whose interests are turned both inward and outward?<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
6. Who is incredibly conceited?<br/>E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
7. Who is more interested in the welfare of others than in his own?<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
8. Who hates women?<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
9. Whose interests are turned inward?<br/>I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
10. Who hates marriage?<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

KEY: 1–ascetic, 2–extrovert, 3–egoist, 4–misanthrope, 5–ambivert, 6–egotist, 7–altruist, 8–misogynist, 9–introvert, 10–misogamist



## SESSION 2
### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

Every word in the English language has a history—and these ten are no exception. In this section you will learn a good deal more about the words you have been working with; in addition, you will make excursions into many other words allied either in meaning, form, or history to our basic ten.

#### 1. the ego
*Egoist* and *egotist* are built on the same Latin root—the pronoun *ego*, meaning *I. I* is the greatest concern in the *egoist’s* mind, the most overused word in the *egotist’s*vocabulary. (Keep the words differentiated in your own mind by thinking of the *t* in *talk*, and the additional *t* in *egotist.*) *Ego* itself has been taken over from Latin as an important English word and is commonly used to denote one’s concept of oneself, as in, “What do you think your constant criticisms do to my *ego?*” *Ego* has also a special meaning in psychology—but for the moment you have enough problems without going into *that.*

If you are an *egocentric* , you consider yourself the *center* of the universe—you are an extreme form of the *egoist.* And if you are an *egomaniac* , you carry *egoism* to such an extreme that your needs, desires, and interests have become a morbid obsession, a *mania.* The *egoist* or *egotist* is obnoxious, the *egocentric* is intolerable, and the *egomaniac* is dangerous and slightly mad.

*Egocentric* is both a noun (“What an *egocentric* her new roommate is!”) and an adjective (“He is the most *egocentric* person I have ever met!”).

To derive the adjective form of *egomaniac*, add -*al*, a common adjective suffix. Say the adjective aloud:

*egomaniacal*

#### 2. others
In Latin, the word for *other* is *alter*, and a number of valuable English words are built on this root.

*Altruism*, the philosophy practiced by *altruists*, comes from one of the variant spellings of Latin *alter*, other. *Altruistic* actions look toward the benefit of *others.* If you *alternate*, you skip one and take the *other*, so to speak, as when you play golf on *alternate*  Saturdays.

An *alternate* in a debate, contest, or convention is the *other* person who will take over if the original choice is unable to attend. And if you have no *alternative*, you have no *other* choice.

You see how easy it is to understand the meanings of these words once you realize that they all come from the same source. And keeping in mind that *alter* means *other*, you can quickly understand words like *alter ego, altercation*, and *alteration.*

An *alteration* is of course a change—a making into something *other.* When you *alter*  your plans, you make *other* plans.

An *altercation* is a verbal dispute. When you have an *altercation* with someone, you have a violent disagreement, a “fight” with words. And why? Because you have *other* ideas, plans, or opinions than those of the person on the *other* side of the argument. *Altercation*, by the way, is stronger than *quarrel* or *dispute*—the sentiment is more heated, the disagreement is likely to be angry or even hot-tempered, there may be recourse, if the disputants are human, to profanity or obscenity. You have *altercations*, in short, over pretty important issues, and the word implies that you get quite excited.

Alter ego , which combines *alter*, other, with *ego*, I, self, generally refers to someone with whom you are so close that you both do the same things, think alike, react similarly, and are, in temperament, almost mirror images of each other. Any such friend is your *other I*, your *other self*, your *alter ego.*

### USING THE WORDS

#### Can you pronounce the words?

Digging a little into the derivation of three of our basic words, *egoist, egotist*, and *altruist*, has put us in touch with two important Latin roots, *ego*, I, self, and *alter*, other, and has made it possible for us to explore, with little difficulty, many other words derived from these roots. Pause now, for a moment, to digest these new acquisitions, and to say them *aloud.*

| Words                             | Pronunciation |
| --------------------------------- | ------------- |
| 1. *ego*                          |               |
| 2. *egocentric*                   |               |
| 3. *egomaniac*                    |               |
| 4. *egomaniacal*                  |               |
| 5. *altruism*                     |               |
| 6. *altruistic*                   |               |
| 7. to *alternate* (*v.*)          |               |
| 8. *alternate* (*adj.* or *noun*) |               |
| 9. *alternative*                  |               |
| 10. *alteration*                  |               |
| 11. to *alter*                    |               |
| 12. *altercation*                 |               |
| 13. *alter ego*                   |               |
#### Can you work with the words? (I)

You have seen how these thirteen words derive from the two Latin roots *ego*, I, self, and *alter*, other, and you have pronounced them aloud and thereby begun to make them part of your active vocabulary.

Are you ready to match definitions to words?

| 1. ego          | a. one who is excessively fixated on his own desires, needs, etc. |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 2. egocentric   | b. to change                                                 |
| 3. altruism     | c. argument                                                  |
| 4. to alternate | d. one’s concept of oneself                                  |
| 5. to alter     | e. to take one, skip one, etc.                               |
| 6. altercation  | f. philosophy of putting another’s welfare above one’s own   |

KEY: 1–d, 2–a, 3–f, 4–e, 5–b, 6–c

#### Can you work with the words? (II)

| 1. egomaniacal        | a. a change                                    |
| --------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| 2. altruistic         | b. other possible                              |
| 3. alternative        | c. interested in the welfare of others         |
| 4. alteration         | d. one’s other self                            |
| 5. alter ego          | e. a choice                                    |
| 6. alternate (*adj.*) | f. morbidly, obsessively wrapped up in oneself |

KEY: 1–f, 2–c, 3–e, 4–a, 5–d, 6–b

#### Do you understand the words?

If you have begun to understand these thirteen words, you will be able to respond to the following questions.

1. Is rejection usually a blow to one’s *ego?*<br/>YES   NO
2. Are *egocentric* people easy to get along with?<br/>YES   NO
3. Does an *egomaniac* have a normal personality?<br/>YES   NO
4. Are *egomaniacal* tendencies a sign of maturity?<br/>YES   NO
5. Is *altruism* a characteristic of selfish people?<br/>YES   NO
6. Are *altruistic* tendencies common to egoists?<br/>YES   NO
7. Is an *alternate* plan necessarily inferior?<br/>YES   NO
8. Does an *alternative* allow you some freedom of choice?<br/>YES   NO
9. Does *alteration* imply keeping things the same?<br/>YES   NO
10. Do excitable people often engage in *altercations?*<br/>YES   NO
11. Is your *alter ego* usually quite similar to yourself?<br/>YES   NO

KEY: 1–yes, 2–no, 3–no, 4–no, 5–no, 6–no, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–no, 10–yes, 11–yes

#### Can you recall the words?

Have you learned these words so well that you can summon each one from your mind when a brief definition is offered? Review first if necessary; then, without further reference to previous pages, write the correct word in each blank. Make sure to check your spelling when you refer to the Key.

1. one’s other self<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
2. to change<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
3. a heated dispute<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
4. excessively, morbidly obsessed with one’s own needs, desires, or ambitions<br/>E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
5. unselfish; more interested in the welfare of others than in one’s own<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
6. utterly involved with oneself; self-centered<br/>E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
7. a choice<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
8. one who substitutes for another<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

KEY: 1–alter ego, 2–alter, 3–altercation, 4–egomaniacal, 5–altruistic, 6–egocentric, 7–alternative, 8–alternate

## SESSION 3
### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

#### 1. depends how you turn
*Introvert, extrovert*, and *ambivert* are built on the Latin verb *verto*, to turn. If your thoughts are constantly turned inward (*intro*-), you are an *introvert;* outward (*extro*-), an *extrovert;* and in both directions (*ambi*-), an *ambivert.* The prefix *ambi*-, both, is also found in *ambidextrous* , *able to use both hands with equal skill.* The noun is *ambidexterity* .

*Dexterous*  means *skillful*, the noun *dexterity* is *skill.* The ending -*ous* is a common adjective suffix (*famous, dangerous, perilous*, etc.); -*ity* is a common noun suffix (*vanity, quality, simplicity*, etc.).

(Spelling caution: Note that the letter following the *t*- in *ambidextrous* is -*r*, but that in dexterous the next letter is -*e.*)

*Dexter* is actually the Latin word for *right hand*—in the *ambidextrous* person, both hands are *right hands*, so to speak.

The right hand is traditionally the more skillful one; it is only within recent decades that we have come to accept that “lefties” or “southpaws” are just as normal as anyone else—and the term *left-handed* is still used as a synonym of *awkward.*

The Latin word for the *left hand* is *sinister.* This same word, in English, means *threatening, evil*, or *dangerous*, a further commentary on our early suspiciousness of left-handed persons. There may still be some parents who insist on forcing left-handed children to change (though left-handedness is inherited, and as much an integral part of its possessor as eye color or nose shape), with various unfortunate results to the child—sometimes stuttering or an inability to read with normal skill.

The French word for the *left hand* is *gauche*, and, as you would suspect, when we took this word over into English we invested it with an uncomplimentary meaning. Call someone *gauche* and you imply clumsiness, generally social rather than physical. (We’re right back to our age-old misconception that left-handed people are less skillful than right-handed ones.) A *gauche* remark is tactless; a *gauche*offer of sympathy is so bumbling as to be embarrassing; *gaucherie* is an awkward, clumsy, tactless, embarrassing way of saying things or of handling situations. The *gauche* person is totally without finesse.

And the French word for the *right hand* is *droit*, which we have used in building our English word *adroit*. Needless to say, *adroit*, like *dexterous*, means *skillful*, but especially in the exercise of the mental facilities. Like *gauche, adroit*, or its noun *adroitness*, usually is used figuratively. The *adroit* person is quickwitted, can get out of difficult spots cleverly, can handle situations ingeniously. *Adroitness*is, then, quite the opposite of *gaucherie.*

#### 2. love, hate, and marriage
*Misanthrope, misogynist*, and *misogamist* are built on the Greek root *misein*, to hate. The *misanthrope* hates mankind (Greek *anthropos*, mankind); the *misogynist* hates women (Greek *gyne*, woman); the *misogamist* hates marriage (Greek *gamos*, marriage).

*Anthropos*, mankind, is also found in *anthropology, the study of the development of the human race; and in *philanthropist*, one who loves mankind and shows such love by making substantial financial contributions to charitable organizations or by donating time and energy to helping those in need.

The root *gyne*, woman, is also found in *gynecologist*, the medical specialist who treats female disorders. And the root *gamos*, marriage, occurs also in *monogamy*, *bigamy*, and *polygamy*.

(As we will discover later, *monos* means *one, bi*- means *two, polys* means *many.*)

So *monogamy* is the custom of only *one* marriage (at a time).

*Bigamy*, by etymology, is *two* marriages—in actuality, the unlawful act of contracting another marriage without divorcing one’s current legal spouse.

And *polygamy*, by derivation *many* marriages, and therefore etymologically denoting plural marriage for either males *or* females, in current usage generally refers to the custom practiced in earlier times by the Mormons, and before them by King Solomon, in which the man has as many wives as he can afford financially and/or emotionally. The correct, but rarely used, term for this custom is *polygyny*—*polys*, many, plus *gyne*, woman.

What if a woman has two or more husbands, a form of marriage practiced in the Himalaya Mountains of Tibet? That custom is called *polyandry*, from *polys*plus Greek *andros*, male.

#### 3. making friends with suffixes
English words have various forms, using certain suffixes for nouns referring to persons, other suffixes for practices, attitudes, philosophies, etc, and still others for adjectives.

Consider:

| *Person*                         | *Practice, etc.* | *Adjective*                 |
| -------------------------------- | ---------------- | --------------------------- |
| 1. misanthrope *or*misanthropist | misanthropy      | misanthropic                |
| 2. misogynist                    | misogyny         | misogynous *or*misogynistic |
| 3. gynecologist                  | gynecology       | gynecological               |
| 4. monogamist                    | monogamy         | monogamous                  |
| 5. bigamist                      | bigamy           | bigamous                    |
| 6. polygamist                    | polygamy         | polygamous                  |
| 7. polygynist                    | polygyny         | polygynous                  |
| 8. polyandrist                   | polyandry        | polyandrous                 |
| 9. philanthropist                | philanthropy     | philanthropic               |
| 10. anthropologist               | anthropology     | anthropological             |
You will note, then, that -*ist* is a common suffix for a person; -*y* for a practice, attitude, etc.; and -*ic* or -*ous* for an adjective.

#### 4. living alone and liking it
*Ascetic* is from the Greek word *asketes*, monk or hermit.

A monk lives a lonely life—not for him the pleasures of the fleshpots, the laughter and merriment of convivial gatherings, the dissipation of high living. Rather, days of contemplation, study, and rough toil, nights on a hard bed in a simple cell, and the kind of self-denial that leads to a purification of the soul.

That person is an *ascetic* who leads an existence, voluntarily of course, that compares in austerity, simplicity, and rigorous hardship with the life of a monk.

The practice is *asceticism*, the adjective *ascetic.*

### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

Notice how efficiently you can master words by understanding their etymological structure. Stop for a moment to review the roots, prefixes, and suffixes you have studied. Can you recall a word we have discussed in this chapter that is built on the indicated prefix, root, or suffix?

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX | MEANING                                  | EXAMPLE         |
| -------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | --------------- |
| 1. *ego*             | self, I                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 2. *alter*           | other                                    | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 3. *intro*-          | inside                                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 4. *extro*-          | outside                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 5. *verto*           | turn                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 6. *ambi*-           | both                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 7. *misein*          | hate                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 8. *anthropos*       | mankind                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 9. *gyne*            | woman                                    | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 10. *gamos*          | marriage                                 | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 11. *asketes*        | monk                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 12. *centrum*        | center                                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 13. *mania*          | madness                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 14. *dexter*         | right hand                               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 15. *sinister*       | left hand                                | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 16. *gauche*         | left hand                                | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 17. *droit*          | right hand                               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 18. *monos*          | one                                      | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 19. *bi*-            | two                                      | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 20. *polys*          | many                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 21. *andros*         | male                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 22. -*ist*           | person who (*noun suffix*)               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 23. -*y*             | Practice, custom, etc. (*noun suffix*)   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 24. -*ous*           | adjective suffix                         | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 25. -*ity*           | quality, condition, etc. (*noun suffix*) | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
### USING THE WORDS

#### Can you pronounce the words? (I)

Say each word aloud! Hear it in your own voice! *Say it often enough so that you feel comfortable with it, noting carefully from the phonetic respelling exactly how it should sound.*

Remember that the first crucial step in mastering a word is to be able to say it with ease and assurance.

| Words     | Pronunciation                                          |
| --------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1. *ambidextrous*     |                                           |
| 2. *ambidexterity*    |                                    |
| 3. *dexterous*        |                                                 |
| 4. *dexterity*        |                                           |
| 5. *sinister*         |                                                |
| 6. *gauche*           | (Say the English word *go*, then quickly add -*sh.*) |
| 7. *gaucherie*        |                                                |
| 8. *adroit*           |                                                   |
| 9. *adroitness*       |                                              |
| 10. *anthropology*    |                                         |
| 11. *anthropologist*  |                                        |
| 12. *anthropological* |                                     |
| 13. *philanthropist*  |                                          |
| 14. *philanthropy*    |                                           |
| 15. *philanthropic*   |                                           |
| 16. *gynecologist*    |                      |
| 17. *gynecology*      |                         |
| 18. *gynecological*   |                      |
| 19. *monogamist*      |                                             |
| 20. *monogamy*        |                                              |
| 21. *monogamous*      |                                              |
#### Can you pronounce the words? (II)

| Words     | Pronunciation                |
| ------------------- | ------------------ |
| 1. *bigamist*       |         |
| 2. *bigamy*         |          |
| 3. *bigamous*       |          |
| 4. *polygamist*     |      |
| 5. *polygamy*       |       |
| 6. *polygamous*     |       |
| 7. *polygynist*     |      |
| 8. *polygyny*       |       |
| 9. *polygynous*     |       |
| 10. *polyandrist*   |    |
| 11. *polyandry*     |     |
| 12. *polyandrous*   |     |
| 13. *misanthropist* |   |
| 14. *misanthropy*   |    |
| 15. *misanthropic*  |    |
| 16. *misogyny*      |       |
| 17. *misogynous*    |       |
| 18. *misogynistic*  |  |
| 19. *misogamy*      |       |
| 20. *misogamous*    |        |
| 21. *asceticism*    |      |
#### Can you work with the words? (I)

Check on your comprehension! See how successfully you can match words and meanings!

| 1. ambidextrous | a. evil, threatening                            |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| 2. dexterous    | b. hating mankind                               |
| 3. sinister     | c. skillful                                     |
| 4. gauche       | d. awkward                                      |
| 5. misanthropic | e. capable of using both hands with equal skill |

KEY: 1–e, 2–c, 3–a, 4–d, 5–b

#### Can you work with the words? (II)

| 1. anthropology | a. system of only one marriage    |
| --------------- | --------------------------------- |
| 2. gynecology   | b. hatred of women                |
| 3. monogamy     | c. illegal plurality of marriages |
| 4. bigamy       | d. study of human development     |
| 5. misogyny     | e. study of female ailments       |

KEY: 1–d, 2–e, 3–a, 4–c, 5–b

#### Can you work with the words? (III)

| 1. polygamy     | a. devotion to a lonely and austere life  |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 2. misogamy     | b. skill, cleverness                      |
| 3. asceticism   | c. custom in which one man has many wives |
| 4. philanthropy | d. love of mankind                        |
| 5. adroitness   | e. hatred of marriage                     |

KEY: 1–c, 2–e, 3–a, 4–d, 5–b

#### Can you work with the words? (IV)

| 1. polygynist     | a. student of the development of mankind |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| 2. polyandrist    | b. one who engages in charitable works   |
| 3. anthropologist | c. male with a plurality of wives        |
| 4. gynecologist   | d. women’s doctor                        |
| 5. philanthropist | e. female with a plurality of husbands   |

KEY: 1–c, 2–e, 3–a, 4–d, 5–b

#### Do you understand the words?

1. Can *ambidextrous* people use either the left or right hand equally well?<br/>YES   NO
2. Should a surgeon be manually *dexterous?*<br/>YES   NO
3. Is a *sinister*-looking person frightening?<br/>YES   NO
4. Is *gaucherie* a social asset?<br/>YES   NO
5. Is an *adroit* speaker likely to be a successful lawyer?<br/>YES   NO
6. Is a student of *anthropology* interested in primitive tribes?<br/>YES   NO
7. Does a *gynecologist* have more male than female patients?<br/>YES   NO
8. Is *monogamy* the custom in Western countries?<br/>YES   NO
9. Is a *misogamist* likely to show tendencies toward *polygamy?*<br/>YES   NO
10. Is a *bigamist* breaking the law?<br/>YES   NO
11. Is a *philanthropist* generally altruistic?<br/>YES   NO
12. Does a *misanthropist* enjoy human relationships?<br/>YES   NO
13. Does a *misogynist* enjoy female companionship?<br/>YES   NO
14. Are unmarried people necessarily *misogamous?*<br/>YES   NO
15. Are bachelors necessarily *misogynous?*<br/>YES   NO
16. Is *asceticism* compatible with luxurious living and the pursuit of pleasure?<br/>YES   NO
17. Does a *polyandrist* have more than one husband?<br/>YES   NO

KEY: 1–yes, 2–yes, 3–yes, 4–no, 5–yes, 6–yes, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–no, 10–yes, 11–yes, 12–no, 13–no, 14–no, 15–no, 16–no, 17–yes

### Can you recall the words?

1. philosophy of living austerely<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
2. hatred of women<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
3. hatred of marriage<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
4. hatred of mankind<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
5. skillful<br/>D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
6. awkward<br/>G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
7. evil, threatening<br/>S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
8. describing hatred of women (*adj.*)<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
 *or* M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9. skill<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
10. pertaining to hatred of marriage. (*adj.*)<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
11. pertaining to hatred of mankind (*adj.*)<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
12. social custom of plural marriage<br/>P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
*or* P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
*or* P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13. unlawful state of having more than one spouse<br/>B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
14. doctor specializing in female disorders<br/>G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
15. custom of one marriage at a time<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
16. one who hates the human race<br/>M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
*or* M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

17. able to use both hands with equal skill<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
18. study of mankind<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
19. one who loves mankind<br/>P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
20. skill in the use of both hands<br/>A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

KEY: 1–asceticism, 2–misogyny, 3–misogamy, 4–misanthropy, 5–dexterous, 6–gauche, 7–sinister, 8–misogynous or misogynistic, 9–adroitness, 10–misogamous, 11–misanthropic, 12–polygamy, polyandry, *or* polygyny, 13–bigamy, 14–gynecologist, 15–monogamy, 16–misanthropist *or* misanthrope, 17–ambidextrous, 18–anthropology, 19–philanthropist, 20–ambidexterity

### CHAPTER REVIEW

#### A. Do you recognize the words?

1. Puts selfish desires first: (a) egoist, (b) egotist, (c) altruist
2. Is self-analytical: (a) extrovert, (b) introvert, (c) ambivert
3. Hates women: (a) misogamist, (b) misanthrope, (c) misogynist
4. One’s other self: (a) altercation, (b) alter ego, (c) alteration
5. Awkward, clumsy: (a) adroit, (b) dexterous, (c) gauche
6. Plural marriage as a custom: (a) bigamy, (b) polygamy, (c) monogamy
7. Study of human development: (a) asceticism, (b) philanthropy, (c) anthropology

8. Plurality of husbands as a custom: (a) misogyny, (b) polygyny, (c) polyandry

KEY: 1–a, 2–b, 3–c, 4–b, 5–c, 6–b, 7–c, 8–c

#### B. Can you recognize roots?

| ROOT                    | MEANING     |
| ----------------------- | ----------- |
| 1. *ego*                | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  egoist         |             |
| 2. *alter*              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  alternative    |             |
| 3. *verto*              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  introvert      |             |
| 4. *misein*             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  misogynist     |             |
| 5. *anthropos*          | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  anthropologist |             |
| 6. *gyne*               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  gynecologist   |             |
| 7. *gamos*              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  bigamy         |             |
| 8. *centrum*            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  egocentric     |             |
| 9. *dexter*             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  dexterous      |             |
| 10. *droit*             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  adroit         |             |
| 11. *monos*             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  monogamy       |             |
| 12. *andros*            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  polyandry      |             |


KEY: 1–self, 2–other, 3–to turn, 4–to hate, 5–mankind, 6–woman, 7–marriage, 8–center, 9–right hand, 10–right hand, 11–one, 12–male

### TEASER QUESTIONS FOR THE AMATEUR ETYMOLOGIST

Suppose you met the following words in your reading. Recognizing the roots on which they are constructed, could you figure out the meanings? Write your answers on the blank lines.

1. *anthropocentric:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
2. *andromania:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
3. *gynandrous:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
4. *monomania:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
5. *misandrist:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

(*Answers in Chapter 18.*)

### STICK TO YOUR TIME SCHEDULE!

In three sessions, you have become acquainted with scores of new, vital, exciting words. You understand the ideas behind these words, their various forms and spellings, their pronunciation, their derivation, how they can be used, and exactly what they mean. I do not wish to press a point unduly, but it is possible that you have learned more new words in the short time it took you to cover this chapter than the average adult learns in an entire year. This realization should make you feel both gratified and excited.

Funny thing about time. Aside from the fact that we all, rich or poor, sick or well, have the same amount of time, exactly twenty-four hours every day (that is looking at time from a static point of view), it is also true that we can always find time for the things we enjoy doing, almost never for the things we find unpleasant (and that is looking at time from the dynamic point of view). I am not merely being philosophical—I am sure you will agree with this concept if you give it a little thought.

If you have enjoyed learning new words, accepting new challenges, gaining new understanding, and discovering the thrill of successful accomplishment, then make sure to stay with the time schedule you have set up for yourself.

*A crucial factor in successful, ongoing learning is routine.*

Develop a comfortable time routine, persevere against all distractions, and you will learn anything you sincerely want to learn.

So, to give yourself an edge, write here the day and hour you plan to return to your work:

DAY:  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
DATE: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
TIME: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
