# Quick Start

## We’re Both Nature and Nurture

“What is my next career step?”, “Why is my friend acting so strangely?”, or “How am I still not happy?” — Have you ever heard or asked questions like these?

We’re each unique. At the same time, there are patterns to how we think, feel, and act. That’s our personality. And when we know how we function, we can make wiser choices.

Insights into our own and others' psychology brings many benefits. 

- We better understand our family, friends, colleagues, and even people we may call “enemies”. 
- We can make better choices around our career and lifestyle, like what fits our skills, interests, and style. 
- We learn how to create better relationships—staying open-minded (and open-hearted), showing care, and building trust. 
- Often, we enjoy more positive emotions when things make sense.

In short, when we better understand personality, we:

- spend less time expecting others to be like us,
- spend less time trying to be like others,
- become more flexible when interacting with people who are different from us, and
- get more from being ourselves, enjoying what we do best.

### From People Types to Neuro-Variants

Carl Jung’s 1921 book, *Psychological Types,* described 8 ways we function. Later, in the 1940s, Isabel Myers and Katherine Briggs packaged his ideas as 16 types to better share with the public. Each of the 16 represents a balanced way to thrive: a pair of cognitive processes that help us, inside and out, to perceive and decide. As many millions of people have discovered: when we know which type fits best—our operating system so-to-speak—we can make the most of our gifts.

As of late, research including brain imaging expands the picture to show how we develop in various ways. We can talk about 4 variants of each of the 16 types, for **64 subtypes total**. Each subtype reflects the impact of culture, upbringing, career choice, relationships, and more.

When you know your best-fit subtype, the way ahead tends to get really clear and specific. In a nutshell, the brain-based subtypes are:

1. **Dominant**
   More confident and driven. More often in leader roles.
2. **Creative**
   More exploratory and sociable. More often in rebel roles.
3. **Normalizing**
   More conventional and dedicated. More often in support roles.
4. **Harmonizing**
   More empathic and reflective. More often in relater roles.

These are not crisp categories. They are like points on a compass. When you know where you and others *currently* sit on the compass, you can more precisely understand others, as well as choose specific career and lifestyle options more in tune with how you operate.

### Three Basic Principles

Before jumping to confirm your type and subtype, and find some life suggestions, let’s sit a little more with a proverbial glass of wine and talk philosophy, because our attitude, our frame of mind, matters. Here are three simple points to hold on to:

1. Personality is foremost about persons, not just theories, traits, or statistics. Every person is a unique, whole, organic being.
2. We are 50/50 nature and nurture. Genetics research shows that 40%-60% of personality is inherited, which means half is environment! Similarly, studies show that people’s behavior can shift slowly over decades even as a core self remains stable.
3. **Real change equals behavior change**. We are called to do some uncomfortable work and try life changes that will shift who we are.

In this book, you will find a mix—a 50/50 blend of nature and nurture, theory and environment—to better make sense of yourself and others. This will help you see the story of your past more clearly, and you will be empowered to make more satisfying choices going forward. Just switching on a light can be tremendously validating and energizing!

?>注意不要问题简单化，先天和后天都会影响

> <center><strong><font size=5>This Book is For You!</font></strong></center>
>
> **Anyone Seeking Self-Understanding and Growth**: This book offers tools and concepts for self-awareness, notably through the lens of personality type and subtype. Readers looking to delve deeper into their own nature, nurture, and inherent tendencies will find it valuable.
>
> **Career Professionals**: Since there’s a focus on aligning subtype with one’s best-fit career path, this book benefits career counselors, recruiters, human resources professionals, and others who advise individuals on career paths and professional development.
>
> **Coaches and Consultants**: There is specific advice for coaching the subtypes to help coaches and consultants to better understand their clients and offer more personalized advice, especially around topics like energy management and pursing hidden aspirations.
>
> **Psychologists and Therapists**: Each type chapter covers cognitive processes, neuroses and similar elements that professionals in mental health and therapy will find useful, especially if they already integrate some personality type theory in their practice.
>
> **Students of Psychology and Personality**: Those studying psychology, human behavior, and personality theory (formally or out of personal interest) will get their fill from the novel content and research presented.
>
> **Individuals Interested in Eastern Philosophy**: Given the focus later in the book on yin and yang energies, those who appreciate or study Eastern philosophies will enjoy this holistic approach.
>
> **Business Leaders and Managers**: Understanding the diverse personalities and subtypes of team members can help leaders to foster better communication, create more harmonious teams, and maximize productivity by aligning tasks with individuals’ inherent strengths.
>
> **General Readers**: Anyone curious about understanding human behavior, personal development, and the intricate dynamics of nature vs. nurture will find this accessible, research-based book enlightening.

## A Metaphor for Change

People are living systems, not mechanical or abstractions. Thus, a smart metaphor to understand ourselves is nature. A tree is born and grows according to its genetics and environment, from soil to weather. It has metabolism, like what we call functions in personality type. It has a design, with branches, leaves, fruits, a trunk and roots that follow a sensible pattern. And it has a role (purpose) in the larger environment. A tree also adjusts through the passage of seasons. As you explore the subtypes in this book, you might think of them like the seasons, as places you can visit, with meaning, even if you have a favorite subtype right now.

## What’s at Stake?[^1]

Before you start, consider **one big thing that’s “at stake” in your life**? It might be a relationship, career choice, or anything else that really matters and begs for action. As in, if you don’t act, there will surely be problems, maybe big ones? Often, we don’t want to think about these things because they evoke[^2] dread[^3]. But do your best to name one big thing:

> Ideally, by the time you get to the final chapter, Fulfill Your Aspirations, you’ll be on your way to addressing what’s at stake.

## Alchemical[^4] Magic

Dr. Jung intended his framework to act as a therapeutic and developmental tool. Imagine a well that you can keep returning to, in order to find refreshment and new insight time and again. We can ignore the well, and stay where we are, biased and stuck. Or we can recognize what is at stake and dare to make a change.

So, how can you grow? 

- For one, you can review, reflect on, and discuss the framework: cognitive processes, types, subtypes, and so on. 
- Secondly, every type chapter includes “reminders for growth”. You can select some to act on. 
- And third, the final four chapters, six through nine, include activities and advice.

Along the way, you can follow in Dr. Jung’s footsteps with “alchemy[^5]”. Jung observed a central challenge in every person, and in every society: **bias**. That is, we all become imbalanced, both in our practical affairs and internally, psychologically. To restore balance, **he engaged his clients in practices that evoked strange images and feelings, what he called “material” from the unconscious**. Then he helped the person express that material, to make something of it. In the act of doing so, the person transformed and balance was restored, eventually. Particularly in the final chapter, you will have opportunities to do this.

?>bias — imbalanced：这条线其实与中国传统医学的理念很像

## The Journey Ahead

Don’t know the Myers-Briggs types at all? Uncertain of your type? Already feeling overwhelmed? Here are the key stops in this book.

Chap. 2: Personality Type Basics: Learn about the famous Dr. Carl Jung and his framework of 8 cognitive processes. These are the diverse ways we get information and make decisions, and are validated with over 130,000 people. The result is 16 personality types, from ESTJ to INFP. What are your likely favorite processes and type code?

Chap. 3: From 16 Types to 64 Subtypes: The story continues, based on demographics[^6], brain data, and convergent research from around the world. Learn about four neuro-variants, where 16 types x 4 variants equals 64 subtypes. For every ESTJ or INFP, there is a Dominant, Creative, Normalizing and Harmonizing variant. These are flexible over time and reflect development. Your subtype may start to come into focus here.

Chap. 4: Subtypes in Action: Four Vignettes[^7] : Get a better feel for the subtypes through short stories about four people of the same type.

Chap. 5: The 64 Subtype Descriptions: Jump to your type, or explore any or all types. Look at each type from multiple angles: its favorite processes, conversations with people of that type, brain-based portraits of the subtypes, and ways the type shows up as neurotic, unbalanced, and secretly aspirational. There’s also advice.

Chap. 6: Coaching the Subtypes: Now that you know your subtype, what’s next? Maybe you are a coach, consultant or counselor. Or, maybe you just wish to make the most of where you are now. Reflect on the advice here and form an action plan. Includes body-mind exesrcises.

Chap. 7: Navigate Your Neurotic Boundary: Everyone gets into trouble, or even goes nuts, in a different and maybe dramatic way. Ironically, **our neuroses[^8]—forever popping in and out of consciousness—are also our most fertile[^9] ground for continued growth**.

Chap. 8: The Yin and Yang of Type: **Personality is more than behavior. It’s energy**. What’s your energy? Underlying every facet of personality is a subtle bias for *yang* or *yin* energy. Yang is focused, confident, and active. Yin is diffuse, accepting, and reflective. What is your mix of these two primal forces? And how might you rebalance them?

Chap. 9: Fulfill Your Aspirations: This is what we all hope for, a road map or suggestions to identify and get to our deepest aspirations. When we recognize the “inferior” side of our personality, and incorporate it into our career, hobbies, and relationships, we find the secret treasure that we didn’t even know we valued.

Appendix: Cognitive Processes Assessment: Go here, or go online to www.keys2cognition.com, to complete a questionnaire to get your personality profile. How much do you use each of the 8 cognitive processes, and what is your likely type code?

---

[^1]: **PHRASE**处于危险境地;处于成败关头<br/>If something is **at stake**, it is being risked and might be lost or damaged if you are not successful.

[^2]: **VERB**唤起;召唤;引起<br/>To **evoke** a particular memory, idea, emotion, or response means to cause it to occur.

[^3]: **N-UNCOUNT**忧虑;恐惧<br/>**Dread** is a feeling of great anxiety and fear about something that may happen.

[^4]: **ADJ**炼金术的；炼丹术的<br/>**Alchemical[æl'kemɪkəl]** means relating to the science of alchemy.

[^5]: **N-UNCOUNT**炼金术；炼丹术<br/>**Alchemy[ˈælkəmi]** was a form of chemistry studied in the Middle Ages, which was concerned with trying to discover ways to change ordinary metals into gold.

[^6]: **N-PLURAL**(某个地方或社会的)人口特征，人口统计数据<br/>The **demographics** of a place or society are the statistics relating to the people who live there.

[^7]: **N-COUNT**（清晰介绍事物特征的）短文，简介，花絮<br/>A **vignette[vɪnˈjet]** is a short description, picture, or piece of acting which expresses very clearly and neatly the typical characteristics of the thing that it represents.

[^8]: **N-VAR**神经症<br/>**Neurosis[nʊˈroʊsɪs]** is a mental condition which causes people to have unreasonable fears and worries over a long period of time.

[^9]: **ADJ-GRADED**(土地、土壤)肥沃的，丰腴的<br/>Land or soil that is **fertile** is able to support the growth of a large number of strong healthy plants.
