# Surface: Ego-Conconscious

I will begin unrolling Jung’s map of the psyche by looking at his description of human **consciousness** and its most central feature, the ***ego***. “**Ego**” is a technical term whose origin is the Latin word meaning “I.” **Consciousness** is the state of **awakeness**, and at its center there is an “I.” This is an obvious starting point, and it is the entrance to the vast inner space that we call the **psyche**. It is also a complex feature of the psyche, one that still holds many puzzles and unanswered questions.

Although Jung was more interested in discovering what lay beneath consciousness in the ==hinterlands== of the psyche, he also took on the task of describing and explaining human consciousness. He wanted to create a complete map of the psyche, so this was unavoidable: **ego-consciousness** is a prime feature of the territory he was exploring. Jung cannot really be called an ego psychologist, but he did place a **social value** on the ego. He offered an **account** of the ego’s functions, and he recognized the critical importance of greater consciousness for the future of human life and for culture. Moreover, he was acutely aware that ego-consciousness is itself the prerequisite for psychological investigation. It is the **tool**. Our knowledge as human beings about anything at all is conditioned by the capacities and limitations of our consciousness. To study consciousness, therefore, is to direct attention to the instrument that one is using for psychological investigation and exploration.

Why is it so important, especially in psychology, to understand the nature of ego-consciousness? It is because **one needs to make adjustments for distortion**. Jung said that **every psychology is a personal confession**. Every creative psychologist is limited by his or her own personal biases and unexamined assumptions. Not all that seems true to even the most ==earnest== and sincere investigator’s consciousness is necessarily accurate knowledge. Much that passes for knowledge among human beings is actually, upon closer and more critical inspection, merely prejudice or belief based on distortion, bias, ==hearsay==, speculation, or pure fantasy. Beliefs pass as knowledge and are clung to as reliable certainties. “I believe in order that I may understand,” a famous remark from St. Augustine, may sound strange to our modern ears today, and yet this is often the case when people begin to speak about psychological reality. Jung seriously sought to examine the foundations of his own thinking by critically examining the instrument he was using to make his discoveries. He argued strongly that **a critical understanding of consciousness is essential for science, just as it has been for philosophy**. Accurate understanding of the psyche, or of anything else for that matter, depends upon the state of one’s consciousness. Jung wanted to offer a critical understanding of consciousness. This was his primary objective in writing the key work, *Psychological Types*, which describes eight cognitive styles that distinguish human consciousness and process information and life experience differently.

The Relation of Ego to Consciousness
----------------------------------------

Jung therefore writes a great deal about ego-consciousness throughout his published works. For my purposes here, I will discuss primarily the first chapter of the late work *Aion,* entitled “The Ego,” as well as some related texts and passages. These summarize his position adequately and represent his mature thinking on the subject. At the end of this chapter I will also include some references to *Psychological Types*.

*Aion* can be read on many different levels. It is a work of Jung’s later years and reflects his profound engagement with Western intellectual and religious history and their future, as well his most detailed thoughts about the **archetype** of the self. The first four chapters were added to the book later to provide the new reader with an introduction to his general psychological theory and to offer an entry point into the vocabulary of analytical psychology. While these introductory pages are not detailed or particularly technical, they do contain Jung’s most condensed discussions about the psychic structures called **ego**, **shadow**, **anima**, **animus**, and **self**.

Here Jung defines the ego as follows: “**It forms, as it were, the centre of the field of consciousness; and, in so far as this comprises the empirical personality, the ego is the subject of all personal acts of consciousness.**” Consciousness is a “field,” and what Jung calls the “empirical personality” here is our personality as we are aware of it and experience it firsthand. The ego, as “the subject of all personal acts of consciousness,” occupies the center of this field. The term ego refers to one’s experience of oneself as a center of **willing**, **desiring**, **reflecting**, and **acting**. This definition of the ego as the center of consciousness is consistent throughout all of Jung’s writings.

Jung continues this text by commenting on the function of the ego within the psyche: “**The relation of a psychic content to the ego forms the criterion of its consciousness, for no content can be conscious unless it is represented to a subject.**” The ego is a “subject” to whom psychic contents are “represented.” It is like a mirror. Moreover, **a connection to the ego is the necessary condition for making anything conscious**—a feeling, a thought, a perception, or a fantasy. The ego is a kind of mirror in which the psyche can see itself and can become aware. The degree to which a psychic content is taken up and reflected by the ego is the degree to which it can be said to belong to the realm of consciousness. When a psychic content is only vaguely or marginally conscious, it has not yet been captured and held it in place upon the ego’s reflective surface.

In the passages that follow this definition of the ego, Jung makes a crucial distinction between conscious and unconscious features of the psyche: **consciousness is what we know, and unconsciousness is all that we do not know**. In another text, written at about the same time, he makes this a little more precise: “The unconscious is not simply the unknown, it is rather the *unknown psychic;* and this we define ... as all those things in us which, if they came to consciousness, would presumably differ in no respect from the known psychic contents.” The distinction between conscious and unconscious, so fundamental in Jung’s general theory of the psyche, as it is in all of depth psychology, posits that some contents are reflected by the ego and held in consciousness, where they can be further examined and manipulated, while other psychic contents lie outside of consciousness either temporarily or permanently. The unconscious includes all psychic contents that lie outside of consciousness, for whatever reason or whatever duration. Actually, this is the vast bulk of the psychic world. The unconscious was the major area of investigation in depth psychology, and Jung’s most passionate interest lay in exploring that territory. But more of that later.

Often in his writings Jung refers to the **ego** as a “**complex**,” a term that will be discussed extensively in the next chapter. In the *Aion* passage, however, he simply calls it a specific content of consciousness, stating by this that **consciousness is a broader category than the ego and contains more than only the ego**.

What is consciousness itself, this field in which the ego is located and where it occupies and defines the center? Most simply, **consciousness is awareness**. It is the state of being awake, of observing and registering what is going on in the world around and within. Humans are not, of course, the only conscious beings on earth. Other animals are conscious as well, since obviously they can observe and react to their environments in carefully ==modulated== ways. Plants’ sensitivity to their environment can also be taken as a form of consciousness. By itself, consciousness does not set the human species apart from other forms of life. Nor is consciousness something that sets human adults apart from infants and children. In the strictest sense, human consciousness does not depend for its essential quality upon age or psychological development at all. A friend who observed the birth of his daughter told me how moved he was when, after the ==placenta== was removed and her eyes were cleaned, she opened them and looked around the room, taking it in. Obviously this was a sign of consciousness. The eye is an indicator of the presence of consciousness. Its aliveness and movement is the signal that an aware being is observing the world. Consciousness depends not only on sight, of course, but on the other senses as well. In the ==womb==, before the infant’s eyes are functioning to see, it ==registers== sounds, reacts to voices and to music, and indicates a remarkable degree of responsiveness. We do not yet know exactly when the embryo first attains a level of awareness and reactiveness that could definitely be called conscious, but it is early and it is certainly in the prenatal period.

The opposite of consciousness is deep dreamless sleep, the total lack of responsiveness and ==sentient== awareness. And the permanent absence of consciousness from a body is practically a definition of death, except in cases of longterm coma. Consciousness, even if it is only the potential for future consciousness, is the “life factor”; it belongs to living bodies.

**What development does to consciousness is add specific content**. In theory, human consciousness can be separated from its contents—the thoughts, memories, identity, fantasies, emotions, images, and words that crowd its space. But in practice this is almost impossible. In fact, only advanced spiritual ==adepts== seem able to make this distinction convincingly. It is truly a ==sage== who can separate consciousness from its contents and keep them apart, whose consciousness is not defined by identifications with selected thoughts and images. For most people, consciousness without a stable object to ground it seems to be an exceedingly ==ephemeral== and transient thing. The ==substantiality== of consciousness and the feeling of ==solidity== are typically provided by stable objects and contents such as images, memories, and thoughts. Substance and continuity in consciousness are made of these. Yet, as evidence from stroke victims attests, the contents and even the ego functions of consciousness—thinking, remembering, naming and speaking, recognizing familiar images and persons and faces—are actually more transient and fragile than is consciousness itself. It is possible to lose one’s memory entirely, for example, and still be conscious. **Consciousness is like a room that surrounds the psychic contents that temporarily fill it**. And **consciousness precedes the ego, which becomes its eventual center**.

The ego, like consciousness, also transcends and ==outlasts== the particular contents that occupy the room of consciousness at any particular moment. The ego is a focal point within consciousness, its most central and perhaps most permanent feature. Against the opinion of the East, Jung argues that **without an ego, consciousness itself becomes questionable**. But it is true that certain ego functions can be suspended or seemingly ==obliterated== without destroying consciousness completely, and so a sort of ego-less consciousness, a type of consciousness that shows very little evidence of a willful center, an “I,” is a human possibility at least for short periods of time.

For Jung, the ego forms the critical center of consciousness and in fact determines to a large extent which contents remain within the realm of consciousness and which ones drop away into the unconscious. The ego is responsible for retaining contents in consciousness, and it can also eliminate contents from consciousness by ceasing to reflect them. To use Freud’s term, which Jung found useful, the ego can “**repress**” contents it does not like or finds intolerably painful or incompatible with other contents. It can also retrieve contents from storage in the unconscious (i.e., from the memory bank) so long as (a) they are not blocked by defense mechanisms, such as repression, which keep intolerable conflicts out of reach, and (b) they have a strong enough associative connection to the ego—they are “learned” strongly enough.

The ego is not fundamentally ==constituted== and defined by the acquired contents of consciousness such as momentary or even ==chronic== identifications. It is like a mirror or magnet that holds contents in a focal point of awareness. But it also wills and acts. As the vital center of consciousness, it precedes the acquisition of language, personal identity, and even awareness of a personal name. Later acquisitions of the ego, such as recognition of one’s own face and name, are contents that cluster closely around this center of consciousness, and they have the effect of defining the ego and enlarging its range of executive command and self-awareness. Fundamentally, the ego is a virtual center of awareness that exists at least from birth, the eye that sees and has always seen the world from this ==vantage point==, from this body, from this individual point of view. In itself it is nothing, that is, not a thing. It is therefore highly ==elusive== and impossible to ==pin down==. One can even deny that it exists at all. And yet it is always present. It is not the product of nurture, growth, or development. It is ==innate==. While it can be shown to develop and gain strength from this point onward through “collisions” with reality (see below), its core is “given.” It comes with the infant.

As Jung describes the psyche, there is a network of associations among the various contents of consciousness. All of them are linked directly or indirectly to the central agency, the ego. The ego is the center of consciousness not only geographically but also dynamically. It is the energy center that moves the contents of consciousness around and arranges them in orders of priority. The ego is the locus of decisionmaking and free will. When I say, “I am going to the post office,” my ego has made a decision and mobilizes the physical and emotional energy necessary to do the job. The ego directs me to the post office and gets me there. It is the executive who sets the priorities: “Go to the post office, don’t get distracted by your wish to go for a stroll in the park.” While the ego can be regarded as the center of selfishness (*ego*-ism), it is also the center of altruism. In and of itself, the ego, as Jung understood and described it, is morally neutral, not a “bad thing” as one hears it referred to in common parlance (“oh, he’s got such an ego!”) but a necessary part of human psychological life. The ego is what sets humans apart from other creatures of nature who also possess consciousness; it also sets the individual human being apart from other human beings. It is the individualizing agent in human consciousness.

The ego focuses human consciousness and gives our conscious behavior its purposefulness and direction. Because we have an ego, we possess the freedom to make choices that may defy our instincts for self-preservation, propagation, and creativity. The ego contains our capacity to master large amounts of material within consciousness and to manipulate them. It is a powerful associative magnet and an organizational agent. Because humans have such a force at the center of consciousness, they are able to integrate and direct large quantities of data. A strong ego is one that can obtain and move around in a deliberate way large amounts of conscious content. A weak ego cannot do very much of this kind of work and more easily succumbs to impulses and emotional reactions. A weak ego is easily distracted, and as a result consciousness lacks focus and consistent motivation.

It is possible for humans to remain conscious while suspending much of normal ego functioning. By will we can direct ourselves to be passive and inactive and simply to observe the world within or without, like a camera. Normally, though, it is not possible to maintain a volitionally restrained observational consciousness for a great length of time, because the ego and the wider psyche usually become quickly engaged by what is being observed. When we watch a movie, for example, we may begin by simply observing and taking in the people and scenery. But we soon begin to identify with one character or another, and our emotions become activated. The ego readies itself to act, and if one has difficulty distinguishing between movie images and reality (another ego function) one may be tempted to engage in physical behavior. The body then becomes mobilized, and the ego aims at and intends a particular course of action. Indeed, movies are structured so that viewers will take sides emotionally and support whatever a particular character is doing or feeling. Engaged in this way, the ego becomes activated as a center of wishing, hoping, and perhaps even intending. It is conceivable that one would make a major life decision while watching a movie as a consequence of the feelings and thoughts generated in consciousness by these images. People have been known to leave a movie theater and become violent or lustful as a direct result of the impact of the movie. The ego has become enlisted by emotion, identification, and desire, and uses its directive function and energy to act.



As becomes evident, the ego’s freedom is limited. It is easily influenced by both internal psychic and external environmental stimuli. The ego may respond to a threatening stimulus by taking up arms and defending itself; or it may be activated and stimulated by an interior urge to create, or to love, or to seek revenge. It may also respond to an ego impulse—that is, narcissistically. It may in this way be seized by a need for revenge, for example.

Waking consciousness is focused, then, by the ego’s registering of internal and environmental stimuli and phenomena and putting the body into motion. The origins of the ego, to say it again, extend back before earliest childhood and infancy. Even a very young infant notices shapes in its environment, some of which seem pleasurable, and it reaches out for them. These very early signals of an organism’s intentionality are evidence for the primordial roots of the ego, one’s “I-ness.”

Reflecting on the nature and essence of this “I” leads to profound psychological questions. What is the ego fundamentally? What am I? Jung would simply say that the ego is the center of consciousness.

The “I” feels, perhaps naively, that it has existed forever. Even notions of earlier lifetimes sometimes take on a feeling of truth and reality. It is an open question whether the “I” changes essentially in the course of a lifetime. Is not the “I” that cried for mother at two the same one that cries for a lost love at forty-five or over a lost spouse at eighty? While many features of the ego clearly do develop and change, particularly with regard to cognition, self-knowledge, psychosocial identity, competence, etc., one also senses an important continuity at the heart of the ego. Many people have been moved to find the “child within.” This is nothing less than the recognition that the person I was as a child is the same person I am as an adult. Probably the essential core of the ego does not change over a lifetime. This could also possibly account for the strong intuition and conviction of many people that this core of the ego does not disappear with one’s physical death but either goes to a place of eternal rest (heaven, nirvana) or is reborn in another life on the physical plane (reincarnation).



A child first says “I” at about two. Until then it refers to itself in the third person or by name: “Timmie want” or “Sarah go.” When a child is able to say “I” and to think self-referentially, placing itself consciously at the center of a personal world and giving that position a specific first-person pronoun, it has made a great leap forward in consciousness. But this is by no means the birth of the primordial ego. Long before this, consciousness and behavior have been organized around a virtual center. The ego clearly exists before one can refer to it consciously and reflectively, and the process of coming to know it is gradual and continues throughout a lifetime. Growing into self-consciousness is a process that passes through many stages from infancy to adulthood. One of these Jung describes in some detail in *Memories, Dreams, Reflections,* when he speaks of walking out of a cloud at about the age of thirteen and realizing for the first time: “Now I am myself.”

By virtue of this capacity to achieve a high level of self-knowledge and self-awareness-that is, a self-reflective ego—human consciousness differs from animal consciousness, at least so far as we presently know. This difference is attributable not only to human verbal capacity, which gives us the ability to talk about the “I” that we know we are and thereby to enrich its complexity, but to the sheer self-mirroring function present in human consciousness. This function is prelinguistic and postlinguistic. It is knowing that one is (and later, that one will die). By virtue of having an ego—this built-in mirror within consciousness—we can know that we are and what we are. Other animal species also clearly want to live and to control their environments, and they show evidence of emotion and consciousness as well as intentionality, reality testing, self-control, and much else that we associate with an ego function. But animals do not have, or have much less of, this self-mirroring function within consciousness. They have less of an ego. Do they know that they are, that they will individually die, that they are separate individuals? It is doubtful. The poet Rilke held that animals do not face death the way humans do, and that gives them the advantage of living more fully in the present moment. Animals are not self-conscious in the same way that humans are, and without language they cannot express whatever self-consciousness they do have with any degree of sophistication nor differentiate themselves from others with the kind of linguistic tools humans possess.

After a certain point in development, the human ego and human consciousness become largely defined and shaped by the cultural world in which a person grows up and becomes educated. This is a layer, or wrapping, of ego structure that surrounds the central ego. As a child grows into a culture and learns its forms and habits through family interactions and educational experiences in school, this ego wrapping becomes thicker and thicker. Jung refers to these two features of the ego as “Personality No. 1” and “Personality No. 2.” Personality No. 2 is the innate core ego, and Personality No. 1 is the culturally acquired layer of the ego that grows up over time.

Some specific contents of a person’s ego-consciousness can show a great deal of stability over time. One’s own name is ordinarily a stable feature of consciousness. It may even seem after a certain point to be permanently welded to the ego. While a name is an impersonal handle and belongs to the public arena as part of one’s *persona* (see chaper 5), when it is spoken by a parent or a child or a lover it touches our most intimate places of self-feeling. Yet it must still be recognized that a name is a cultural artifact and as such is less securely fixed to the ego than is, for instance, the body. People have changed their names and remained the same people. So far no one has changed complete bodies to see if this is still the case; if (or when) this comes to pass, we will find out if the ego also transcends the body. I suspect the answer will be that it does indeed transcend the body, even though its relation to the body seems to us so completely fused.

One might be tempted to define the ego as the body’s consciousness of itself as a willing, individual, limited, unique entity. If one had been named differently, it could be argued, one’s essential “I” would not be different than it is. But if one had a different body, would the ego be essentially other? The ego is deeply rooted in a body, more so even than it is in culture, but just how deep this connection goes is open to debate. Nevertheless, the ego is profoundly fearful of the body’s death. It is a fear that the ego’s extinction will follow upon the body’s demise. According to Jung, however, the ego is not strictly limited to the somatic base. In Aion he states that the ego “is not a simple or elementary factor, but a complex one, which as such, cannot be described exhaustively. Experience shows that it rests on two seemingly different bases, the somatic and the psychic.”

In Jung’s thinking, the psyche cannot be reduced to a mere expression of the body, the result of brain chemistry or some such physical process. For the psyche also partakes of mind or spirit (the Greek word *nous* captures best Jung’s thinking on this point), and as such it can and occasionally does transcend its physical location. In later chapters, we shall see more precisely how Jung derives psyche from a combination of physical nature and transcendent spirit or mind, *nous*. But, for now, it is sufficient to note that psyche and body are not coterminous, nor is the one derived from the other. The ego, too, which is predominantly treated by Jung as a completely psychic object, rests only partially on a somatic base. The ego is based in the body only in the sense that it experiences unity with the body, but the body that the ego experiences is psychic. It is a body image. and not the body itself. The body is experienced “from the totality of endosomatic perceptions,”  that is, from what one can consciously feel of the body. These percepts of the body “are produced by endosomatic stimuli, only some of which cross the threshold of consciousness. A considerable proportion of these stimuli occur unconsciously, that is, subliminally ... The fact that they are subliminal does not necessarily mean that their status is merely physiological, any more than this would be true of a psychic content. Sometimes they are capable of crossing the threshold, that is, of becoming perceptions. But there is no doubt that a large proportion of these endosomatic stimuli are simply incapable of consciousness and are so elementary that there is no reason to assign them a psychic nature.”

In this passage, we observe how Jung draws the line on the psyche’s boundary to include ego-consciousness and the unconscious but not the somatic base as such. Many physiological processes never pass over into the psyche, even into the *unconscious* psyche. In principle, they are incapable of ever becoming conscious. It is evident that the sympathetic nervous system, for instance, is for the most part not accessible to consciousness. As the heart beats, blood circulates, and neurons fire, some but not all somatic processes can become conscious. It is not clear just how far the ego’s capacity to penetrate into the somatic base can be developed. Trained yogis claim to be able to exercise very large control over somatic processes. They have been known to will their deaths, for example, and to have simply stopped their hearts at will. One yogi’s ability to change the surface temperature in the palm of his hand by will was tested and verified: he could willfully alter it by ten or twenty degrees. This demonstrates a considerable psychic capacity to penetrate and control the body, but it still leaves much territory untouched. How far down into the cellular substructure can the ego penetrate? Can a trained ego shrink a cancerous tumor, for example, or effectively overcome hypertension? Many questions remain.

One should keep in mind that there are two thresholds: the first separates consciousness from the unconscious, the second separates the psyche (both conscious and unconscious) from the somatic base. I will discuss these thresholds in greater detail in later chapters, but for now it should be noted that they are broad thresholds and should be conceived of as fluid boundaries, not fixed and rigid barriers. The psyche is, for Jung, inclusive of both consciousness and the unconscious, but it does not include all of the body in its purely physiological dimension. The ego, Jung holds, rests on the *psychic* soma, that is, on a body image, and not on the body per se. The ego is therefore essentially a psychic factor.

The Location of the Ego
---------------------------

The whole territory of the psyche is very nearly coterminous with the potential range of the ego. The psyche, as Jung defines it in this passage, is bounded by and limited to where the ego can in principle go. This does not mean that psyche and ego are identical, however, since the psyche includes the unconscious and the ego is more or less limited to consciousness. But the unconscious is at least potentially available to the ego, even if the ego does not ever actually experience much of it. The point here is that the psyche itself has a limit, and that limit is the point at which stimuli or extrapsychic contents can no longer, in principle, *ever* be experienced consciously. In Kantian philosophy, which Jung followed, this nonexperiencable entity is called the *Ding an sich*, the “thing in itself.” Human experience is limited. The psyche is limited. Jung was not a pan-psychist, that is, someone who claims that the psyche is everywhere and makes up everything. The body lies outside of the psyche, and the world is far greater than the psyche.

We should avoid imposing too much precision on Jung’s use of terminology, however, particularly on terms like *psyche* and *unconscious*. Otherwise we will create tight fits where Jung deliberately left gaps and openings. Psyche is not *precisely* co-extensive with the combined territory conscious-and-unconscious, nor is it *exactly* limited to the range of the ego. At the edges, where psyche and soma come together and where psyche and world meet, there are shadings of “inside/outside.” These gray areas Jung calls *psychoid* . This is an area that behaves in a psyche-like way but is not altogether psychic. It is quasi-psychic. In these gray areas lie psychosomatic puzzles, for example. How do mind and body influence each other? Where does one leave off and the other begin? These questions have still not been answered.

Jung draws these subtle distinctions in the *Aion* passage, where he describes the psychic base of the ego this way: “on the one hand the ego rests on the total field of consciousness, and on the other, on the sum total of unconscious contents. These fall into three groups: first, temporarily subliminal contents that can be reproduced voluntarily (memory) ... second, unconscious contents that cannot be reproduced voluntarily ... third, contents that are not capable of becoming conscious at all.” This third group should, by earlier definitions, be left outside of the psyche, and yet Jung here places it inside the unconscious. Evidently he saw that the unconscious reaches a place where it is no longer psyche and extends into nonpsychic regions, that is, into the “world” beyond the psyche. And yet for a certain distance at least this nonpsychic world lies within the unconscious. Here we approach the borders of great mysteries: the basis for extrapsychic perception, synchronicity, miracle healings of the body, and others.

As a scientist, Jung had to provide arguments and evidence for such bold hypotheses as the existence of the unconscious, both its personal and collective aspects. Here he merely alludes to these arguments, which in other writings are developed in great detail: “Group two can be inferred from the spontaneous irruption of subliminal contents into consciousness.” This describes how complexes affect consciousness. “Group three is hypothetical; it is a logical inference from the facts underlying group two.” Certain consistent patterns in the complexes led Jung to hypothesize the archetypes. If certain effects are sufficiently strong and persistent, a scientist formulates a hypothesis which, it is hoped, will account for the effects and lead to further investigation.

The ego, Jung goes on in the *Aion* text, rests on two bases: a somatic (bodily) and a psychic. Each of these bases is multilayered and exists partially in consciousness but mostly in the unconscious. To say that the ego rests on them is to say that the ego’s roots reach into the unconscious. In its upper structure, the ego is rational, cognitive, and reality-oriented, but in its deeper and more hidden layers it is subject to the flux of emotion, fantasy, and conflict, and to intrusions from the physical and psychic levels of the unconscious. The ego can be easily disturbed, therefore, both by somatic problems and by psychic conflicts. A purely psychic entity, a vital center of consciousness, the home of identity and volition, the ego in its deeper layers is vulnerable to disturbances from many sources.

As I pointed out above, the ego must be distinguished from the field of consciousness in which it is nested and for which it forms the focal point of reference. Jung writes: “When I said that the ego ‘rests’ on the total field of consciousness I do not mean that it consists of this. Were that so, it would be indistinguishable from the field of consciousness as a whole.” Like William James who distinguished between the “I” and the “me,” Jung draws a difference between the ego and what James called “the stream of consciousness.” The ego is a point or a dot that dips into the stream and can separate itself from the stream of consciousness and become aware of it as something other than itself. Consciousness is not fully under the ego’s control even if it gains distance from it sufficient to observe and study its flow. The ego moves around within the field of consciousness, observing, selecting, directing motor activity to an extent, but also ignoring a good deal of material that consciousness is otherwise attending to. If you drive a car on a familiar route, the ego’s attention will frequently wander and attend to matters other than driving. You arrive safely at your destination, having negotiated traffic lights and numerous hazardous traffic situations, wondering how you got there! The focus of attention was elsewhere, the ego had wandered off and left the driving to non-egoic consciousness. Consciousness, meanwhile, aside from the ego, is constantly monitoring, taking in, processing, and reacting to information. Should a crisis occur, the ego returns and takes charge. The ego often focuses on a memory, on a thought or feeling, or on plans which it has plucked out of the stream of consciousness. It leaves other routine operations to an habituated consciousness. This separability of the ego from consciousness is a mild and non-pathological form of dissociation. The ego can dissociate from consciousness, to a degree.

Although a rudimentary or primitive ego seems to be present from the earliest moments of consciousness as a sort of virtual center or focal point, it does grow and develop in important respects during the early phases of infancy and later childhood. Jung writes: “Although its bases are themselves relatively unknown and unconscious, both psychic and somatic, the ego is a conscious factor par excellence. It is even acquired, empirically speaking, during the individual’s lifetime. It seems to arise in the first place from the collision between the somatic factor and the environment, and, once established as a subject, it goes on developing from further collisions with the outer world and the inner.” What makes the ego grow, according to Jung, is what he calls “collisions.” In other words, conflict, trouble, anguish, sorrow, suffering. These are what lead the ego to develop. The requirements made upon a person to adapt to physical and psychic environments draws upon a potential center in consciousness and strengthens its capacity to function, in order to focus consciousness and to mobilize the organism in a specific direction. As a virtual center of consciousness, the ego is innate, but as an actual and effective center it owes its stature to those collisions between the psycho-physical body and an environmental milieu that demands response and adaptation. A moderate amount of conflict with the environment and some frustration are, therefore, according to Jung, the best conditions for ego growth.

These collisions may be catastrophic, however, and lead to severe damage to the psyche. Then the nascent ego is not strengthened but rather injured and so severely traumatized that its later functioning is radically impaired. Infant abuse and childhood sexual trauma are examples of such psychic catastrophes. From these the ego is often permanently impaired in its lower psychic registers. Cognitively it may be able to function normally, but in its less conscious parts the emotional turmoil and absence of cohesive structure create severe character disorders and dissociative tendencies. Such egos are not merely vulnerable in a normal fashion—as all egos are—but they are fragile and hyperdefensive. They fragment easily under stress and therefore tend to resort to primitive (but very powerful) defenses to wall off the world and to protect the psyche from intrusions and possible injury. Such people cannot trust others. Paradoxically, they are also constantly let down and seriously disappointed by others and by life in general. Gradually these people isolate themselves from the environment, which is perceived as overwhelmingly threatening, and they live out their lives in defensive isolation.

The nascent ego might be described as an infant’s cry of anguish signaling a discrepancy between need and satisfaction. From there it begins to develop and eventually it becomes more complex. By the time a two-year-old child’s ego is saying “no” to everybody, it is not only coping with environmental challenges, but it is already trying to change or to control many aspects of its environment. That little person’s ego is very busy strengthening itself by creating numerous collisions, and that “no!” and “I won’t!” are exercises that strengthen the ego as a separate entity and as a strong inner center of will, intentionality, and control.

An ego that has achieved autonomy in childhood feels also that consciousness can be harnessed and directed at will. The guardedness characteristic of the overly anxious person is an indication that the ego has not fully achieved this level of confident autonomy. More openness and flexibility is possible when the ego has acquired a degree of control sufficient to insure survival and basic need-gratification.

Jung’s notion of ego development arising from collisions with the environment offers a creative way of viewing the potential in all of those inevitable human experiences of frustration in the face of an ungratifying environment. As the ego tries to apply its will, it meets a certain measure of resistance from the environment, and if this collision is handled well the result will be the ego’s growth. This insight also cautions us against trying to provide too much insulation for a child against the onslaughts of a challenging reality. For stimulating ego growth, a constant-climated overprotective environment is not particularly useful.

Psychological Types
-----------------------

A brief discussion of Jung’s theory of psychological types also belongs in this chapter on ego-consciousness. The editors of Jung’s *Collected Works* quote Jung in their introductory note to *Psychological Types* as viewing this work to be “a psychology of consciousness regarded from what might be called a clinical angle.” The two major *attitudes* (introversion and extroversion) and the four *functions* (thinking, feeling, sensation, and intuition) have a strong influence upon the ego’s orientation as it undertakes its adaptive tasks and requirements. The core ego’s innate disposition toward assuming one of these attitudes and functions forms its characteristic stance toward the world and toward assimilating experience.

Collisions with reality awaken the nascent ego’s potentiality and challenge it to relate to the world. Such collisions also interrupt the psyche’s *participation mystique* with the surrounding world. Once aroused, the ego must adapt itself to reality by whatever means are available. Jung theorized that there are four such means or functions of the ego, each of which could be oriented by either an introverted (i.e., inward-looking) or extroverted (outward-looking) attitude. After a certain amount of ego development has taken place, the person’s innate tendency to orient to the world, both within and without, will reveal itself in certain definite ways. Jung argued that the ego has an inborn, genetic tendency to prefer one particular *type* of attitude and function combination and to rely secondarily on another complementary combination for balance, with a third and fourth remaining less used and consequently less available and developed. The combinations make up what he called “psychological types.”

For example, a person is born with an innate tendency to assume an introverted attitude toward the world. This first manifests itself as shyness in the infant, and later it develops into a preference to pursue solitary interests such as reading and studying. If this is combined with an innate tendency toward adapting to the environment by using the function of thinking, this person will be naturally inclined to adapt to the world by seeking out activities, such as science or scholarship, which match these tendencies. In such arenas this person does well, feels confident, and finds satisfaction functioning in a way that comes naturally. In other areas, such as socializing or selling newspaper subscriptions door to door, this introverted thinking orientation is much less useful, and the person feels at a loss often with considerable discomfort and stress. If this person is born into a culture that rewards the extroverted attitude more than the introverted one, or into a family that negatively reinforces introversion, the ego is forced to adapt to the environment by developing extroversion. This comes at a high price. The introverted person must assume a good deal of chronic psychological stress in order to make this work. Since this ego adaptation does not come naturally, it will also strike the observer as artificial. It does not work very well, and yet it is necessary. Such a person functions with a handicap, just as a natural extrovert would take on a handicap in an introverted culture.

Typological differences between people lead to a great deal of conflict within families and groups. Children who are typologically different from their parents are often misunderstood and may be coerced into adopting a false typology that conforms to parental preferences. The child with the “correct” typological profile will be preferred and become the favorite. This sets the stage for sibling rivalry and envy. Each child in a large family will be somewhat different typologically, as the parents usually are also. The extroverts may gang up on the introverts, and the introverts are not as good at forming gangs and teams. On the other hand, introverts are better at hiding. If the differences of type can be recognized as a positive value and appreciated, there can be a great enrichment in family life and group politics. What one person can contribute, others will find to be beneficial precisely because they are not tuned into the same wavelength. Recognition and positive appreciation of typological differences can form the basis for creative pluralism in familial and cultural life.

This combination of a superior function and a preferred attitude make up the ego’s single best tool for adapting to and interacting with the inner and outer worlds. The inferior fourth function, on the other hand, is the least available for ego utilization. The secondary function is, next to the superior function, the most useful to the ego, and the superior and secondary functions in combination are most frequently and effectively used for orientation and accomplishment. As a rule one of these two best functions is extroverted and the other is introverted, the extroverted function giving a reading of external reality and the introverted function providing information about what is going on within. The ego uses these tools to control and to transform both inner and outer worlds to the best of its ability.

Much of what we experience of other people, and indeed much of what we come to recognize as our own personalities, does not belong to ego-consciousness. The vitality a person communicates, the spontaneous reactions and emotional responses to others and to life, the burst of humor and the moods and spells of sadness, the puzzling complications of psychological life—all of these qualities and attributes will be assigned to other aspects of the larger psyche, not to ego-consciousness as such. So it is incorrect to think of the ego as being equivalent to the whole person. The ego is simply an **agent**, a focus of consciousness, a center of awareness. We can attribute either too much or too little to it.

Personal Freedom
--------------------

Once the ego has achieved sufficient autonomy and a measure of control over consciousness, the feeling of personal freedom becomes a strong feature of subjective reality. Throughout childhood and adolescence, the range of personal freedom is tested, challenged, and expanded. Typically a young person lives with an **illusion** of much greater self-control and free will than is psychologically true. All the limitations on freedom seem to be imposed from the outside, from society and external regulations, and there is little awareness of how the ego is just as much controlled from within. Closer reflection reveals that **one is as enslaved to one’s own character structure and inner demons as to external authority**. Often this is not realized until the second half of life, when there is typically a dawning awareness that one is one’s own worst enemy, harshest critic, and severest taskmaster. Fate is spun from within as well as dictated from without.

Jung has some thought-provoking reflections to offer on the question of how free the will actually is. As we will see in the chapters to come, the ego is only a small part of a much larger psychological world, like the earth is a small part of the solar system. Learning that the earth revolves around the sun is similar to becoming aware that the ego revolves around a greater psychic entity, the self. Both insights are disturbing and destabilizing to the person who has put the ego at the center. The freedom of the ego is limited. “Inside the field of consciousness [the ego] has, as we say, free will,” Jung writes. “By this I do not mean anything philosophical, only the well-known psychological fact of ‘free choice’, or rather the subjective feeling of freedom.” Within its own domain, ego-consciousness has an amount of apparent freedom. But what is the extent of this? And to what degree do we make our choices on the basis of conditioning and habit? Choosing a Coke rather than a Pepsi reflects a measure of freedom, but in fact this choice is limited by previous conditioning such as advertising and by the availability or lack of other alternatives. A child may be encouraged to practice free will and to make discriminations by being given a choice among three kinds of shirts, for example. The child’s ego feels gratified, for it is free to choose the one it wants. Yet the child’s will is limited by many factors: the subtle wish to please the parent, or contrarily the wish to rebel against the parent; by the range of possibilities offered; by peer group pressures and requirements. Our actual range of free will is, like the child’s, limited by habit, pressure, availability, conditioning and many other factors. In Jung’s words, “just as our free will clashes with necessity in the outside world, so it also finds its limits outside the field of consciousness in the subjective inner world where it comes into conflict with the facts of the self.” The outside world inflicts political and economic limitations, but **subjective factors limit us equally much from exercising free choice**.

Broadly speaking, it is the contents of the unconscious that curtail the free will of the ego. The Apostle Paul expressed this classically when he confessed: “I do not understand my own actions. For I do not do what I want, but I do the very thing I hate ... I can will what is right but I cannot do it.” Demons of contrariness conflict with the ego. Jung concurs: “just as circumstances and outside events ‘happen’ to us and limit our freedom, so the self acts upon the ego like an objective occurrence, which free will can do very little to alter.” When the psyche takes over the ego as an uncontrollable inner necessity, the ego feels defeated and has to face the requirement of accepting its inability to control inner reality just as it has to come to this conclusion regarding the larger surrounding social and physical worlds. Most people in the course of their lives come to realize that they cannot control the external world, but fairly few become conscious that inner psychic processes are not subject to ego control either.

With this discussion we have begun to enter the territory of the unconscious. In the next chapters I will describe Jung’s vision of the unconscious areas of the human psyche, which make up by far the vast majority of its territory.
