# The Populated Interior: The Complexes

In the previous chapter, we saw that ego-consciousness—the surface of the psyche—is subject to disturbances and emotional reactions that are created by collisions between the individual and the external environment. Jung felt that these collisions between psyche and world have a positive function. If not too harsh, they tend to stimulate ego development because they demand greater focusing capacity on the part of consciousness and eventually this leads to stronger problem-solving ability and greater individual autonomy. Forced to make choices and take stands, a person develops the capacity to do more of the same and to do it better. This is like building a muscle by applying isometric tension. The ego grows through many such vigorous interactions with the world. Dangers, attractions, annoyances, threats, and frustrations from other people and various environmental factors all arouse a certain level of focused energy in consciousness, and the ego is mobilized to deal with these aspects of the impinging world.

There are other disturbances of consciousness, however, that are not clearly linked to environmental causes and are out of all proportion to the observable stimuli. What causes these disturbances are not primarily outer but inner collisions. People sometimes go crazy for little apparent reason. Or they have bizarre internal imaginary experiences that lead to inexplicable forms of behavior. They become psychotic, they hallucinate, they dream, or they just plain get mad or fall in love or run amuck. Humans do not always act rationally and behave according to clear calculations of personal interest. The “rational man,” on whom so much economic theory is based, is at best only a partial description of human beings as they actually function. Humans are driven by psychic forces, motivated by thoughts that are not based on rational processes, and subject to images and influences beyond those that can be measured in the observable environment. In short, we are emotion- and image-driven creatures as much as we are rational and environmentally adapted ones. We dream as much as we cogitate, and we feel probably a lot more than we think. At the very least, a lot of thinking is colored and shaped by emotions, and most of our rational calculations are servants of our passions and fears. It was to understand this less rational side of human nature that led Jung to take up the tools of scientific method and spend his life investigating what shapes and motivates human emotion, fantasy, and behavior. This inner world was a *terra incognita* in his day. And he discovered that it is populated.

## Reaching the Unconscious

Imagine for a moment that the psyche is a three-dimensional object like the solar system. Ego-consciousness is the earth, *terra firma;* it is where we live, at least during our waking hours. The space around the earth is filled with satellites and meteorites, some large, some small. This space is what Jung called the unconscious, and the objects that we first come across as we venture out into this space are what he called the *complexes*. The unconscious is populated by complexes. This is the territory that Jung explored initially in his career as a psychiatrist. He later called it the *personal* unconscious.

He began to map this area of the psyche even before he looked very closely at the ego complex or at the nature of consciousness.

He undertook this initial exploration by using a scientific instrument that was highly regarded at the turn of the century, the Word Association Experiment. Later he also employed some insights gleaned from the early writings of Sigmund Freud. Armed with the notion of unconscious determination of mental processes and the Word Association Experiment, Jung led a team of researchers on the scientific project of conducting carefully controlled laboratory experiments to see if such unconscious psychological factors could be verified empirically.

The results of this project were assembled in the book *Diagnostische Assoziationstudien (Studies in Word Association),* edited by Jung. These studies were carried out at the Psychiatric Clinic of the University of Zurich with the support and encouragement of his teacher, Eugen Bleuler. The project was conceived in 1902 and continued over the next five years. The results were singly published between 1904 to 1910 in *Journal für Psychologie und Neurologie.* It was in the course of these experimental studies that Jung began to use the term “complex,” which he borrowed from the German psychologist Ziehen but expanded and enriched with a great deal of his own research and theorizing. This term was later also adopted by Freud and was used widely in psychoanalytic circles until Freud and Jung ended their relationship, after which it was more or less completely deleted, along with Jung and everything “Jungian,” from the Freudian lexicon.

The theory of complexes was Jung’s most important early contribution to the understanding of the unconscious and its structure. Partially it was Jung’s way of conceptualizing what Freud had been writing about up to that point on the psychological results of repression, on the enduring importance of childhood for the structure of character, and on the puzzle of resistance in analysis. It continues to be a useful concept in analytic practice to this day. How did he first come to discover and map this feature of the unconscious?

The question was how to penetrate into the mind beyond the barriers of consciousness. Consciousness can be investigated by simply asking questions and noting responses, or by introspecting. But how could one go deeper into the subjective world and explore its structures and workings? To get at this problem, Jung and a team of fellow psychiatric residents set up a series of experiments with human subjects to see if, by bombarding the psyche with verbal stimuli and observing the responses in consciousness—the “tracks,” so to speak, of subtle emotional reactions—they could find evidence of underlying structures. Working closely with his colleagues Bleuler, Wehrlin, Ruerst, Binswanger, Nunberg, and most importantly Riklin, Jung first refined the Word Association Experiment for their purposes and settled on 400 common, everyday, seemingly neutral stimulus words—words like table, head, ink, needle, bread, and lamp. Scattered among these words were more provocative ones—war, faithful, to strike, to stroke. This number was later reduced to 100. These stimulus words, read one by one to a subject who had been instructed to respond with the first word that came to mind, elicited a wide variety of reactions. There would be long pauses, nonsensical responses, rhymes and “klang” responses, and even physiological reactions that could be measured using a device called a psychogalvanometer.

The interesting question for Jung was, what is happening in the psyche of the test subject when the stimulus word is spoken? He looked for emotion, and in particular for signs of stimulation of anxiety and its effects upon consciousness. The response times were clocked and recorded along with the verbatim responses. Then all the stimulus words were repeated a second time, and the subject was asked to repeat each earlier response. Again the results were noted. The test was then analyzed, first by calculating the subject’s average response time, to which all other response times were compared. Some words might take one second to elicit a response, others ten seconds; others might produce no response at all as the subject blocked completely. Then other types of responses were noted. Some words would be met with idiosyncratic responses such as rhymes, nonsense words, or uncommon associations. Jung considered these responses to be *complex indicators*—signs of anxiety and evidence of defensive reactions against unconscious psychological conflicts. What could they tell him about the nature of the unconscious?

## The Complexes

Jung assumed that the disturbances of consciousness, which were registered and measured as responses to these verbal stimuli, were due to unconscious associations to the words read. Here his thinking was congruent with Freud’s as expressed in *The Interpretation of Dreams*, where Freud had argued that dream images could be linked up with thoughts and feelings from the previous day (or even from previous years, including the time all the way back to early childhood). Such associations, however, are extremely obscure and hidden. The associations exist, Jung reasoned, not between the stimulus and response words, but rather between the stimulus words and hidden, unconscious contents. Some stimulus words activate unconscious contents, and these are associated with yet other contents. When stimulated, this network of associated material—made out of repressed memories, fantasies, images, thoughts—produces a disturbance in consciousness. The complex indicators are the signs of disturbance. Precisely what causes the disturbance still needs to be ferreted out, and this was done through further questioning of the subject and then through more analysis if that was needed. But the disturbances registered by this experiment provided the key sites for further exploration and offered evidence that unconscious structures were indeed located beneath the level of awareness. Often subjects did not at first know why certain words caused these reactions.

Jung observed that measurable disturbances in the stream of consciousness are sometimes related to seemingly innocuous stimulus words like “table” or “barn.” Analyzing the patterns of response, he found that the words showing disturbance can be clustered thematically. These clusters point to a common content. When the subjects were asked to talk about their associations to these clusters of stimulus words, they gradually were able to tell him about highly charged emotional moments in their past. Usually traumas were involved. The stimulus words, it turned out, had aroused painful associations that had been buried in the unconscious, and these stressful associations were what had disturbed consciousness. The unconscious contents responsible for the disturbances of consciousness Jung called “complexes.”

Having established that complexes exist in the unconscious, Jung was interested in examining them further. With tools such as the Word Association Experiment he could measure them rather precisely. Exact measurement could transform vague intuitions and speculative theories into data and into science, a fact very pleasing to Jung’s scientific temperament. Jung found that he could measure the emotional charge held by a particular complex if he simply added up the number of complex indicators it generated and the severity of these disturbances. This indicated to him the relative quantity of psychic energy bound up in that complex. Investigation of the unconscious could thus be quantified. This information would also become important for therapy, as a guide to where the most severe emotional problems of a patient were located and what work needed to be done in the treatment. It is especially useful for short-term psychotherapy.

The results of his experiments convinced Jung that there are indeed psychic entities outside of consciousness, which exist as satellite-like objects in relation to ego-consciousness but are able to cause ego disturbances in a surprising and sometimes overwhelming way. They are the gremlins and inner demons that may catch a person by surprise. The disturbances caused by complexes must be differentiated, understandably, from disturbances brought about by stressors originating in the external environment, even though they may and often do relate intimately to one another.

When Jung sent his *Diagnostischen Assoziationstudien* to Freud in April 1906, Freud immediately recognized a kindred spirit and wrote him a warm letter of thanks. The two men met a year later, and from that moment until they finally ended their correspondence early in 1913, their relationship was emotionally and intellectually filled with high purpose and intensity. One might say that they succeeded in stimulating core complexes in each other. Certainly they connected profoundly around their shared interest in the unconscious. For Jung, the personal connection with Freud had enormous implications for his career in psychiatry and also for the later development of his own psychological theory. Both his career and his theory took their early shape in the shadow of Freud’s growing cultural presence. And yet, for all that, Jung’s final map of the inner world is remarkably independent of Freudian influence. Jung’s mind was fundamentally non-Freudian, and so his map of the psyche is vastly different from Freud’s. For readers who are familiar with Freud’s work, this will become evident in the remainder of this book. These two men lived in different intellectual universes.

By 1910, Jung’s theoretical work on the complexes was largely complete. In later years he would continue to elaborate it a bit, but he did not add much new material or change his mind about the basic concept of the complex except to add that every complex contains an archetypal (i.e., innate, primitive) component. His paper, “A Review of the Complex Theory,” published in 1934, offers an excellent summary. Written long after his break with Freud, Jung makes some highly complimentary references to his former teacher and colleague and to psychoanalysis generally as he acknowledges Freud’s significance for his own work on the theory of complexes. If Freud’s influence is to be found importantly anywhere in Jung’s theories, it is here.

It is worth noting that Jung delivered “A Review of the Complex Theory” in May 1934 in Bad Neuheim, Germany at the 7th Congress for Psychotherapy. At the time, Jung was president of the International Medical Society for Psychotherapy, which sponsored this conference. The political situation in Germany was at the time fraught with conflict and confusion. The Nazis, having recently taken power, were attacking Freud, a Jew, as a poisonous influence to be expunged from German culture. Freud’s books were burned and his ideas violently opposed. Jung, who had been vice president of the organization and had accepted the presidency in 1933, was faced with a complicated and dangerous set of political options. On the one hand, it was a terrible time to be the leader of any type of organization in German-speaking lands. The Nazis watched like hawks for the least sign of departure from their racist doctrines. This medical society was no exception. Jung was heavily pressured to say what the German officials wanted to hear and to conform to their program. On the other hand, it was a moment when a non-German psychiatrist could possibly make a difference in this international association. It was Jung’s intent to preserve the organization as an international medical society. One of his first acts as president was to modify the constitution so that German Jewish doctors could maintain their membership as individual members even though they were excluded from all German medical societies. In 1933 there was no way to know how effective and all-consuming the evil impulse of the Nazi leaders would turn out to be.

On the shadow side of the ledger, however, this was also a moment of professional opportunity for Jung. Freud had been pre-eminent among psychiatrists and psychologists in Germany for the past decade, and now Jung’s ideas had a chance to come to the fore. Jung was walking a moral tightrope. The world was watching, and every move he made during this period influenced public opinion. Jung’s decision to accept the presidency of this medical organization in 1933 and his subsequent role in it until 1940 have been the cause for a great deal of heated discussion then and now. Charges that Jung was sympathetic to Hitler’s policies and to the Nazi program of “purifying” the German *volk* have an important source in the things he actually, perhaps inadvertently and under severe political pressure, said and did in his first years as president.

One item in Jung’s favor is that he did present this particular paper, “A Review of the Complex Theory,” at Bad Neuheim in 1934, for in this presidential address he does not discount the importance of Freud. In fact, he credits him with as much influence as he could reasonably be expected to give to an early mentor with whom he had broken and to whom he had not spoken for twenty years. In 1934, it was courageous to speak in even mildly positive tones about Freud in Germany. Jung was if anything protecting Freud’s international reputation by giving him so much credit in this paper.

The paper begins with a discussion of the word association work Jung sponsored and carried out in the early years of his career. Having learned a great deal in the meantime about how human beings react to one another in clinical and other intimate settings, he starts by focusing on the psychological dimensions of the experimental situation. He points out that in and of itself this testing situation already leads to the constellation of complexes. Personalities affect each other, and when they begin to interact a psychic field is set up between them which stimulates the complexes.

The term “constellation” appears frequently in Jung’s writings and is an important one in the Jungian lexicon. It is a word that often mystifies readers at first. Usually it refers to the creation of a psychologically charged moment, a moment when consciousness either already is, or is about to become, disturbed by a complex. “This term simply expresses the fact that the outward situation releases a psychic process in which certain contents gather together and prepare for action. When we say that a person is ‘constellated’ we mean that he has taken up a position from which he can be expected to react in a quite definite way.” Complex reactions are quite predictable once one knows what the specific complexes of an individual are. We refer to the complex-laden areas of the psyche colloquially as “buttons,” as in “She knows how to press my buttons!” When you press such a button, you get an emotional reaction. In other words, you constellate a complex. After you have known a person for a while, you know where some of their buttons are and either avoid these tender areas or go out of your way to touch them.

Experientially everyone knows what it means to be constellated. It occurs on a spectrum from being slightly anxious to losing it and going over the top into madness. When a complex is constellated, one is threatened with loss of control over one’s emotions and to some extent also one’s behavior. One reacts irrationally and often regrets it or thinks better of it later. For the psychologically-minded, there is the depressing knowledge that one has been here many times before, has reacted in just this way on many occasions, and yet is utterly helpless to refrain from doing the same thing again this time. When constellated, one is as though in the grip of a demon, a force stronger than one’s will. This creates a feeling of helplessness. Even as one watches oneself becoming the witless victim of an inner compulsion to say or do something one knows should better be left unsaid or undone, the scenario unscrolls as predicted and the words are said, the deeds done. An intrapsychic force has been called into action by a constellating situation.

The architects of these constellations “are definite complexes possessing their own specific energy.” The complex’s “energy” (this term will be discussed more thoroughly in the next chapter) refers to the precise amount of potential for feeling and action that is bound up in the magnet-like core of the complex. The complexes have energy and manifest a sort of electronic “spin” of their own, like the electrons surrounding the nucleus of an atom. When they are stimulated by a situation or an event, they give off a burst of energy and jump levels until they arrive in consciousness. Their energy penetrates the shell of ego-consciousness and floods into it, thereby influencing it to spin in the same direction and to discharge some of the emotional energy that has been released by this collision. When this happens, the ego is no longer altogether in control of consciousness or, for that matter, of the body. The person becomes subject to energic discharges that are not under the ego’s control. What the ego can do, if it is strong enough, is to contain some of the complex’s energy within itself and to minimize emotional and physical outbursts. But, to a degree, none of us is wholly responsible for what we say and do while in the grip of a complex. Needless to say, this does not constitute an effective defense in a court of law. Sometimes society demands a higher standard than the psyche will allow.

The complexity (pardon the pun) of the psyche is becoming apparent. In fact, Jung’s theory was sometimes called complex psychology (rather than the more usual name for it, analytical psychology): both complexity and the concept of complexes are fundamental to his view of the psyche. The psyche is made up of many centers, each of them possessing energy and even some consciousness and purpose of their own.

In this conceptualization of the personality, the ego is one complex among many. Each has its own specific quantum of energy. When we speak of the ego’s energy, we call it “free will.” If we wish to refer to the amount of energy tied up in a complex, we can speak of the power of our inner demons. These are the irrational compulsions that can seize us and do with us more or less what they want. A complex generally creates its effects within the domain of consciousness, but this is not always so. Sometimes the disturbances occur outside of the psyche altogether. Jung observed that a complex can affect objects and other people in the surrounding world. It can act as a poltergeist or a subtle influence on other people.

Jung made another interesting observation about complexes. A person can sometimes block the effects of a stimulus and fend off the constellation of a complex: “subjects with strong wills can, through verbal-motor facility, screen off the meaning of a stimulus word by short reaction times in such a way that it does not reach them at all, but this only works when really important personal secrets have to be protected.” This means that people can control their unconscious reactions by deliberately screening out stimuli. To overcome this obstacle in the testing situation, Jung cooked up what is the precursor of the lie detector test. It was an ingenious extension of the Word Association Experiment.

By measuring the skin’s electrical conductivity with a psycho-galvanometer, Jung showed that changes in conductivity correlate with complex indicators. In other words, when a person lies or tries to hide the evidence of a complex-charged reaction, the ego may be able to cover up some of the indicators, but it has a much more difficult time suppressing the more subtle physiological responses. In response to a complex-stimulating word or question a person might get sweaty palms or begin shivering or experience dryness of the mouth. By measuring skin conductivity, Jung introduced a more refined method of collecting complex indicators. By using this device, Jung was able to solve a case of robbery in his psychiatric hospital. Needless to say, this method is not infallible.

Most people’s egos will normally be able to neutralize the effects of complexes to some degree. This ability serves the interests of adaptation and even survival. This is akin (or perhaps identical) to the ability to dissociate. If one could not do this, the ego would become dysfunctional just at the moment of greatest danger when keeping a cool head is most desperately needed. In professional life, it is essential to put one’s personal complexes to the side for the sake of carrying on with one’s job. Psychotherapists have to be able to bracket their own emotions and personal conflicts when they are seeing patients. In order to be present for a patient whose life is in shambles, the therapist must stay calm even though this may be a moment of chaos in the therapist’s own life. All professions demand that the job get done no matter what is going on in personal life. As they say in theater, the show must go on. This requires the ability to override the effects of complexes upon ego-consciousness to at least some degree. In discussing this ability to contain one’s own personal anxieties and complex reactions, Jung refers to a consummate master of this art, the diplomat Talleyrand. Diplomats operate on instruction from heads of state and use a vocabulary that betrays little of their own feeling or preference. They prize the art of speaking in terms that conceal emotion and hide complex indicators. And they have the advantage of not being hooked up to psychogalvanometers.

## Levels of the Unconscious

Usually one considers complexes to be “personal.” And it is true that most complexes are generated in a person’s own specific life history and belong strictly to the individual. But there are also family and social complexes. Such complexes belong no more to the individual than a disease belongs to an individual. It belongs to a collective, and the individual “catches” it. This means that in society many people are similarly wired, psychologically speaking. People who grow up in the same families or extended kinship groups or traditional cultures share a great deal of this common unconscious structure. Even in a large and diverse society like America, many typical experiences are shared throughout the entire population. Nearly every child begins school at the age of five or six, experiences the same stress of tests and trauma of failures and humiliations, then goes through the anxiety of applying to colleges for further education or to businesses for jobs. All of these common experiences at the hands of similarly disposed persons in authority create socially based psychological patterns through a kind of subtle programming of the personal unconscious. Shared traumas make for shared complexes. Sometimes these are generational. Earlier, one often spoke of a “depression mentality” characteristic of people who came of age in the 1930s and shared the trauma of the Great Depression. Today we speak of the “Vietnam veteran” and assume that all who participated in this war share more or less the same type of complex-formation from the traumas of fighting in that war.

We can think here of a cultural layer of the unconscious, a sort of cultural unconscious. It is personal in the sense that it is acquired in the individual’s lifetime, but it is collective because it is shared with a group. The unconscious, at this level, is structured by larger cultural patterns and attitudes, and these end up influencing the individual’s conscious attitudes and the more unique complexes within a nexus of unconscious cultural assumptions. (The cultural unconscious is different from the collective unconscious, which I will discuss in chapter 4.)

This raises the interesting question of how complexes are formed. The usual answer is by trauma. But this must be put into a wider social context. Some of Jung’s studies in word association looked at the question of family influences on the formation of unconscious contents in children. Through the Word Association Experiment he found strong evidence of strikingly similar patterns of complex formation among family members—between mothers and daughters, fathers and sons, and mothers and sons, for example. Of these combinations, the closest were mothers and daughters. Their responses to the stimulus words revealed nearly identical anxieties and conflicts. From this Jung concluded that the unconscious is importantly patterned by close relationships in the family environment. Exactly how this takes place is not clear from his work. Is it by some sort of transmission? Is it by repetition of similar traumas passed along through the generations? This is not answered.

Later in a child’s development these early psychic structures are modified significantly by exposure to the wider culture. The psyche’s constant exposure to social and cultural stimuli, from TV and school, becomes a factor in later stages of childhood, and this reduces the psychological influence of ethnic and family cultures, at least in a pluralistic society like America’s. When the peer group becomes central, it generates important new structural elements, many of them based, however, on commonly available cultural patterns. And yet the early family-induced complexes do not disappear from the psyche. The mother and father complexes continue to dominate the scene in the personal unconscious. They are the giants.

## Psychic Images

To get at the basic structure of the complex, it must be broken down into its parts. “What then, scientifically speaking, is a ‘feeling-toned complex’?” Jung asks. “It is the image of a certain psychic situation which is strongly accentuated emotionally and is, moreover, incompatible with the habitual attitude of consciousness.”  The word “image” is key here. It is an extremely important term for Jung. Image defines the essence of psyche. Sometimes Jung uses the word Latin *imago* rather than image to refer to a complex. The “mother imago” is the mother complex, as distinguished from the actual mother. The point is that the complex is an image and as such belongs essentially to the subjective world; it is made of pure psyche, so to speak, although it also represents an actual person, experience, or situation. It should not be mistaken for objective reality—for another actual person or a material body. The complex is an inner object, and at its core it is an image.

Surprisingly, there may be a close correspondence between a psychic image and external reality, even when no chance exists that the psyche has been imprinted by it or recorded it from experience. Konrad Lorenz, a famous ethologist, studied innate reflex responses in some animals in reaction to specific stimuli. For example, chicks who had never been exposed to chicken hawks knew to run for cover when a chicken hawk flew overhead and its shadow appeared on the ground. Using devices that ran on wires overhead and cast shadows resembling the chicken hawk, ethologists have shown that untutored chicks, seeing the shadow, will run for cover. The defensive response to a predator is built into the chick’s system, and the image of the predator is innate and recognized without having to be learned.

Complexes operate in a similar way, only in humans they seem to be only quasi-instinctive rather than truly instinctive. They act like instincts in that they produce spontaneous reactions to particular situations or persons, but they are not purely innate in the same way that instincts are. Mostly they are products of experience—trauma, family interactions and patterns, cultural conditioning. These are combined with some innate elements, which Jung called archetypal images, to make up the total package of the complex. Complexes are what remain in the psyche after it has digested experience and reconstructed it into inner objects. In human beings, complexes function as the equivalent of instincts in other mammals. Imagoes, or complexes, are, in a manner of speaking, constructed human instincts.

Dreams are made out of these unconscious images, the complexes. Jung speaks in various places of complexes as being the architects of dreams. Over a period of time, dreams present images, patterns, repetitions, and themes that give us a picture of what a person’s complexes look like.

“This image has a powerful inner coherence, it has its own wholeness and, in addition, a relatively high degree of autonomy, so that it is subject of the control of the conscious mind to only a limited extent, and therefore behaves like an animated foreign body in the sphere of consciousness.” Each of these features of the image—its inner coherence, its wholeness, and its autonomy—are important aspects of Jung’s definition of the complex. A complex possesses psychic solidity; it is stable and endures through time. Left in its own space without intervention or challenge by ego-consciousness, a complex tends not to change very much. One can witness this in repetitions of the same patterns of emotional reaction and discharge, the same mistakes, the same unfortunate choices made over and over again in a person’s life.

Analysis tries to uncover the complexes and expose them to the conscious reflection of the ego. This intervention can alter them somewhat. In analysis a person learns how the complexes function, what triggers their constellation, and what can prevent their endless repetition. Without such intervention on the part of the ego, a complex will behave like an animated foreign body or an infection. In the grip of a complex, a person can feel quite helpless and emotionally out of control.

Generally, the psychological effects of complex constellations perseverate over an extended period of time after the stimulus has left off impacting the psyche. “Certain experimental investigations seem to indicate that [the complex‘s] intensity or activity curve has a wavelike character with a ’wavelength’ of hours, days, or weeks.” The stimulus that provokes the complex may be slight or great, of long or short duration, but its effects on the psyche can continue for extended periods of time and can come into consciousness in waves of emotion or anxiety. One of the signs of effective psychotherapy is that the complex-induced disturbances perseverate for shorter lengths of time than they did before. A more rapid recovery from complex-induced disturbances indicates increased ego strength and integration of psychic material, as well as decreased power in the complexes. A shortened perseveration time means that the complex’s power has diminished. Nevertheless, it must be recognized that a complex can never be completely eliminated. The wavelike effects of complex “after-shock” are exhausting and draining. The discharge of a powerful complex can consume an enormous amount of psychic and physical energy.

## Personality Fragments

The complexes can be thought of, too, as personality fragments or subpersonalities. Every adult’s personality is somewhat vulnerable to disintegration because it is constructed of large and small fragments. These can come unglued. “My findings in regard to complexes corroborate the somewhat disquieting picture of the possibilities of psychic disintegration, for fundamentally there is no difference in principle between a fragmentary personality and a complex. They have all the essential features in common, until we come to the delicate question of fragmented consciousness. Personality fragments undoubtedly have their own consciousness, but whether such small psychic fragments as complexes are also capable of a consciousness of their own is a still unanswered question.” Jung is here raising an important but extremely subtle question about the differences between normal dissociation, more severe dissociative disorders, and multiple personality disorder.

Every human being can and does from time to time dissociate, in the sense of experiencing mild altered states of consciousness or splitting off from traumatic experience in order to keep functioning. Being “in complex” is itself a state of dissociation. Ego-consciousness becomes disturbed and, depending upon the extent of the disturbance, can be thrown into a state of considerable disorientation and confusion. Since complexes possess a type of consciousness in their own right, a person who is “in complex” is in a sort of state of possession by an alien personality. In the multiple personality disorder, these various states of consciousness are not held together by a unifying consciousness, and the ego is not able to bridge the psychic space among the pieces. In this case, the ego is restricted to fragments of consciousness, while each other complex possesses a sort of ego of its own, each operating more or less independently. Each has its own identity and even its own type of control over somatic functions. Some studies of multiple personalities have indicated surprising psyche-soma connections in each of the subpersonalities, to the extent that one personality may show physical capacities or difficulties not displayed by others. One personality may be allergic to tobacco smoke, another can be a chain smoker.

The multiple personality represents an extreme form of personality dissociation. The integration processes normally active in the psyche have been thwarted by severe (usually sexual) childhood trauma. But to a lesser degree, everyone has multiple personalities, because everyone has complexes. The difference lies in the fact that complexes are as a rule subordinated to an integrated ego, and ego-consciousness is maintained when a complex is constellated. In general, the complexes have less energy than the ego has, and they show only minimal consciousness of their own. The ego, in contrast, has considerable energy and will at its disposal, and it is the primary center of consciousness.

While the ego is responsible for much of what we call motivation and purpose, the other complexes also seem to have a separate purpose and will. Often this is in conflict with what the ego complex wants at a particular moment. Jung describes complexes as “the actors in our dreams, whom we confront so powerlessly; they are the elfin beings so aptly characterized in Danish folklore by the story of the clergyman who tried to teach the Lord’s prayer to two elves. They took the greatest pains to repeat the words after him correctly, but at the very first sentence they could not avoid saying: ‘Our Father, who are not in heaven’. As one might expect on theoretical grounds, these impish complexes are unteachable.”  The moral of this story is that complexes cannot be made to do what the ego wants them to do. They are intractable. They are like frozen memory images of traumatic experiences. And they are not experienced only in dreams but in everyday life as well, where they leave the ego feeling equally powerless.

## The Structure of Complexes

Further on the structure of the complex, Jung describes it as being made up of associated images and frozen memories of traumatic moments that are buried in the unconscious and not readily available for retrieval by the ego. These are repressed memories. What knits the various associated elements of the complex together and holds them in place is emotion. This is the glue. Furthermore, “the feeling-toned content, the complex, consists of a nuclear element and a large number of secondarily constellated associations.” The nuclear element is the core image and experience on which the complex is based—the frozen memory. But this core turns out to be made up of two parts: an image or psychic trace of the originating trauma and an innate (archetypal) piece closely associated to it. The dual core of the complex grows by gathering associations around itself, and this can go on over the course of an entire lifetime. If, for example, a man reminds a woman of her harsh, abusive father by his tone of voice, by his way of reacting to life, by his intensity of emotional response, and so on, he will understandably constellate her father complex. If she interacts with him over a period of time, material will be added to that complex. If he abuses her, the negative father complex will be further enriched and energized, and she will become all the more reactive in situations where the father complex is constellated. Increasingly she may avoid such men entirely, or on the other hand she may find herself irrationally drawn to them. In either case, her life becomes more and more restricted by this complex. The stronger the complexes, the more they restrict the range of the ego’s freedom of choice.

That complexes can be modified by later experience is of course to the benefit of the individual, and the healing potential of psychotherapy depends upon this. Therapy involves a kind of thawing out of the frozen memory images. It can restructure the personality to some extent because transference allows the therapist to stand in for (among other figures of the psyche) the parents, both mother and father, at different stages of therapy. When a parental complex is constellated by the therapist, the patient’s experience of a different kind of parent figure adds material to the old complex and builds a new layer into, or over, it. This new structure does not entirely replace the old, but it can importantly modify it, to the point where the complex no longer restricts a person’s life in such a debilitating way. The harshness of an abusive parent imago may be softened—thawed out—or offset by new structures.

The other piece of the complex’s nuclear core is “a factor innate in the individual’s character and determined by his disposition.”  This piece is archetypal. In the case of parental complexes, for instance, it is an archetypal image of Mother or Father, an image derived not from personal experience but from the collective unconscious. The archetypal elements in the personality are innate dispositions to react, behave, and interact in certain typical and predictable ways. They are similar to the innate release mechanisms of animals. They are inherited and not acquired, and they belong to each human being by virtue of being born human. They are what make us uniquely and characteristically human. Not only the body but also the soul—the psyche—is specifically human and creates the preconditions for all later experience, development, and education. I will expand upon Jung’s theory of archetypes in later chapters. For now it is sufficient to recognize that the archetypal elements of the psyche are experienced in everyday life through the experience of the complexes.

Generally speaking, complexes are created by trauma. Prior to the trauma, the archetypal piece exists as an image and a motivating force but does not have the same disturbing and anxiety-producing qualities of the complex. The trauma creates an emotionally charged memory image that becomes associated with an archetypal image, and together these freeze into a more or less permanent structure. This structure contains a specific amount of energy, and with this it can tie in other associated images to create a network. Thus a complex becomes enriched and extended by later experiences of a similar sort. But not all traumas are of an external nature or are inflicted by abrasive collisions with the environment. There are traumas that occur mostly internal to the individual psyche. Jung indicates that complexes may also be created or supplemented by a “moral conflict, which ultimately derives from the apparent impossibility of affirming the whole of one’s nature.” Everchanging moral attitudes in our society make it impossible to affirm our wholeness completely in many situations. We have to deny our true feelings and refrain from expressing them in order to get along or, occasionally, even to survive. Making such social adjustments for the sake of adaptation creates a social mask, a “persona,” that excludes essential parts of oneself. In general, people prefer to be included in their social groups, and those who bluntly speak their minds or do not conform to group standards tend to be ostracized or marginalized. This social dilemma puts a person into what Jung calls a moral conflict. At the deepest level, the imperative is to be whole. Human nature rebels against the strictures of society and culture if they too severely inhibit this innate drive toward wholeness, and this is a further source of complexes.

This was the issue that Freud took up in Vienna, a society that was officially sexually inhibited but also quite blatantly hypocritical about its sexual mores. Freud demonstrated how the conflicts around sexuality become rooted in psychological patterns and produce neurosis. Sexuality, which is built into the innate makeup of the human being, becomes socially incompatible and is therefore split off from consciousness and repressed. This creates a sexual complex around which related traumas cluster. Fundamentally, what makes the repression of sexuality the source of pathology is the insistent imperative of the human organism to pursue its innate wholeness, which includes uninhibited sexuality. It is not the conflict between the individual and society per se that produces the neurotic problem, as Freud argued, but the moral conflict that comes about in a psyche that wants to deny itself on the one hand but is forced to affirm itself on the other.

## The Eruption of Complexes

Complexes have the ability to erupt suddenly and spontaneously into consciousness and to take possession of the ego’s functions. What appears as utter spontaneity, however, may not be so pure. Often there is a subtle triggering stimulus that can be detected if one looks carefully enough into the recent past. A neurotic depression, for instance, may look endogenous until one finds the tiny insult that set it off. When the ego is possessed in this fashion, it becomes assimilated to the complex and the complex’s purposes, and the result is what we call “acting out.” People who are acting out are often not aware that this is what is going on. They are simply “in a mood,” and the behavior seems congruent with the ego. But this is the nature of possession: the ego is deceived into thinking that it is freely expressing itself. Only in retrospect does one realize, “Something got into me and made me do it. I didn’t know what I was doing!” If another person tries to point out that one is acting out of character, the usual response is angry defensiveness. The person in a state of possession does not take such feedback kindly. Jung says that in the Middle Ages this identification with a complex “went by another name; it was called possession.

Probably no one imagines this state as being particularly harmless, and there is in it no difference in principle between a slip of the tongue caused by a complex and the wildest blasphemies.” The difference is a matter of degree. There are degrees of possession, from the momentary and slight ones to the psychotic and chronic ones. What we see in possession is that features of personality that are usually not a part of the ego’s character and style become blatantly manifest. These unknown features have been built up in the unconscious over a period of time, and suddenly the ego is overcome by this inner opposite. Now the person is possessed by the devil and curses the things that consciousness had formerly held most sacred.

People with Tourette’s Syndrome do this openly on a continual basis. For a person blessed with so-called normal psychology, the splinter personalities show themselves in a multitude of much more subtle ways, some so slight as to be nearly undetectable—slips of the tongue, forgetfulness. In the course of an hour one may pass through several states of consciousness, moods, subpersonalities, and barely notice the shifts. This subtlety passes into more gross forms as we approach the level of true possession. Possession has a more extreme and distinctive quality. It is hard to miss, and it often even acquires the features of a specific character type. A Savior complex, for example, typically develops from painful experiences of abandonment in childhood, and then shows itself in behavior that passes for kindness and helpfulness. These features do not, however, belong to the ego in an integrated way; rather they tend to wax and wane because they are rooted in an autonomous complex over which the ego has little control. These are the people who cannot refrain from being helpful and enabling no matter how destructive it may be to themselves or to others. The behavior is actually controlled by a complex and is therefore not under ego control. It also tends to fluctuate more or less arbitrarily. There are sudden inconsistencies that cannot be anticipated or explained. Sometimes this person will be excessively thoughtful and caring, at other times ruthless, indifferent, or even abusive. Other splinter psyches (complexes) are competing for the ego’s sponsorship. When a possession-prone ego leaves off identifying with one complex, it shifts to another. This other is more often than not a sort of shadow brother or sister of the first. A Christ-like complex with its spiritual, upward-oriented, giving, altruistic features is matched by a Devilish complex with an attitude of materialism and selfishness. The two may alternate in taking possession of the ego, Jekyll-and-Hyde-like. The one will function as the official persona in many public social situations, and the other will dominate the conscious personality in private, intimate settings. This ego is vulnerable to what Jung called “enantiodromia,” a reversal into the opposite.

The complexes are objects of the inner world. “It is on them that the weal and woe of personal life depends. They are the *lares* and *penates* [the household gods] who await us at the fireside, and whose peaceableness it is dangerous to extol.” Such deities are not to be taken lightly.

