# Psychic Energy: Libido Theory

Thus far I have described two basic structures of the psyche—egoconsciousness and the complexes—as Jung conceived and wrote about them. Now I will consider the force that animates these structures and gives them life, namely *libido*. This is desire and emotion, the life blood of the psyche. Jung called libido *psychic energy.* In the previous two chapters, I have frequently used the term energy. This is the dynamic feature of the psyche. Jung’s theory of libido conceptualizes, in an abstract way, the relationships among the various parts of the psyche. To use the metaphor of the psyche as solar system, this chapter is about physics and the forces that affect the various objects in this universe.

In a general philosophical sense, the subject of psychic energy has been investigated by thinkers throughout the ages. It is not something new and modern to reflect upon questions of life force, the will, passion and emotion, the ebb and flow of interest and desire. Philosophers in the West have considered such matters since Heraclitus and Plato, and in the East since Lao-tsu and Confucius. In recent centuries, philosophers like Schopenhauer, Bergson, and Nietzsche have given these questions central attention. Physicians, too, like Anton Mesmer with his theory of a psychic fluid in the body, began to pursue the subject of psychological movement and motivation in more empirical and quasi-scientific ways. The famous nineteenth-century German physician-philosopher C.G. Carus speculated extensively and in depth about the unconscious as a source of energy and noted its extensive influences upon the conscious mind. Jung cites such figures as these, as well as von Hartmann, Wundt, Schiller, and Goethe, as precursors to his own thinking. Although Freud was the modern psychological originator of the term libido and the figure to whom Jung bows in his psychoanalytic discussions of libido theory, he was not the only influence upon Jung or the single figure to whom he was responding in his extensive writings on libido and psychic energy.

A position on the nature and flow of psychic energy is, in fact, fundamental to every philosophy of human nature and the soul, for this will contain the author’s views on motivation and on the dynamic elements in life that separate living beings from the dead. The distinction between movement and stasis constitutes a basic category of human thought, and it leads spontaneously to wondering what accounts for the difference between these two states of being. Why do physical bodies move in space, and why do they move in one direction rather than in another? In physical science these questions lead to theories of causation and the formulation of laws of motion, like the law of gravity. The same is true for philosophy and psychology, where questions of causation, motivation, and the laws governing psychic bodies in movement are equally important. In psychology it becomes a question of the soul and its movement and of its power to move other objects. Aristotle pondered this. Psychic energy is present in a living body and not in a corpse; it is present in all waking life and in dream life; it is what makes the difference between being “on” and being “off,” to use an electrical metaphor. But what is it?

## Sexuality and Libido 

What Schopenhauer called Will and presented as the primal motivator of human activity and thought, Freud chose to call libido.

With this choice of terminology, he emphasized the sensual, pleasure-seeking element in human nature. The soul for Freud is essentially qualified by sexual energy. The Latin word *libido* suited his purposes particularly well because of his conviction that the sexual drive lies at the base of psychic life and is the primary source of the psyche’s movement. Freud’s libido theory became, on the one hand, a polite way to talk about sexuality, giving sex a Latin name and making the conversation sound somewhat medical; on the other hand, it was a way to carry on a quasi-scientific and abstract discussion about how sexuality moves and motivates a person to engage in a variety of different activities and how it ends up in some instances causing neurotic attitudes and behavior.

It was Freud’s contention that sexuality is the prime motivator of most, if not all, mental processes and behavior. Libido is the juice that turns the human machine on and makes it hum, even if the specific activities a person may be engaged in, like playing the violin or counting money, do not look particularly sexual. Sexuality is the primary motivator of even those human activities, as well as the primary cause of the psychological conflicts that end up ensnaring a person in the tangles of neurosis and severe mental illnesses such as paranoia and schizophrenia. In the final analysis, Freud wanted to show, all manifestations of psychic energy in individual and collective life can be assigned, at least in significant part, to the sexual drive and its sublimations or repressions. Freud was particularly intent on demonstrating that sexual conflict lay at the base of all neurotic and psychotic illnesses.

Early in his discussions with Freud about psychological theory and clinical practice, Jung showed grave reservations about the primacy of sexuality and suggested the obvious point that there might be other drives active in human life as well. For instance, there is a basic drive called *hunger:*

As you have noticed, it is possible that my reservations about your far-reaching views are due to lack of experience. But don’t you think that a number of borderline phenomena might be considered more appropriately in terms of the other basic drive, *hunger:* for instance, eating, sucking (predominantly hunger), kissing (predominantly sexuality)?

Two complexes existing at the same time are always bound to coalesce psychologically, so that one of them invariably contains constellated aspects of the other.

This note of disagreement appears already in Jung’s second letter to Freud, dated October 23, 1906. From the very outset of this collaboration, Jung evidently had doubts and reservations about Freud’s insistence on the centrality of sexual conflict in psychopathology. In the years that followed, there were many more letters and numerous published exchanges on the subject of drives and the sources of psychic energy, and Jung went back and forth in his adherence to Freudian doctrine. “Under the impress of Freud’s personality,” Jung would write many years later in his autobiography, “I had, as far as possible, cast aside my own judgments and repressed my criticisms. That was the prerequisite for collaborating with him.” At times in his early writings, Jung sounds like a true reductionist in the Freudian mold. And yet it is also clear from the written record that he never became an uncritical disciple of Freud’s, even though he may have held back in his disagreement for the sake of smoothing over differences and potential troublespots in the relationship.

As it turned out, the debate over how to conceptualize psychic energy and what to name it became much more than a minor technical point. While Jung’s early divergent views may have seemed somewhat trivial and vague, or based on misunderstandings of what Freud meant to say, the implications ran deep and in time these led to major philosophical, theoretical, and clinical disagreements. In fact, their differences on the subject of libido turned out to define the central theoretical point of division between them. At issue was the conception of human nature and the meaning of human consciousness. In the early years, this could not be foreseen with the clarity that hindsight provides. Jung was learning as he went—from Freud and also from his patients and from many other sources.

In the masterful essay “On Psychic Energy,” published in 1928, Jung spells out his fully considered position on the subject of libido. This paper is the primary source for the present chapter. By the time he wrote it in the mid-1920s, he had been separated from Freud and the psychoanalytic movement for more than a decade. This essay has the quality of cool objectivity, whereas his earlier major work on the subject, *Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido* (1912—13) (translated into English in 1916 by Beatrice Hinkle as *Psychology of the Unconscious,* by which title I refer to it throughout this book), was hastily assembled and bears the marks of feverish creative thinking that has not quite settled into place. In that earlier work, composed while he was still in close communication with Freud and indeed was still Freud’s crown prince and heir apparent as president of the International Psychoanalytic Association, he tackled libido theory as a kind of side-issue, but it became the centerpiece before he was finished. I will consider that work briefly here, as historical background, before going on to describe Jung’s later essay on psychic energy.

In a letter to Freud, dated November 14, 1911, Jung wrote:

In my second part [*of Psychology of the Unconscious*] I have got down to a fundamental discussion of the libido theory. That passage in your Schreber analysis where you ran into the libido problem (loss of libido = loss of reality) is one of the points where our mental paths cross. In my view the concept of libido as set forth in the *Three Essays* needs to be supplemented by the genetic factor to make it applicable to Dem[entia] praec[ox].

Jung is referring here to his second chapter in Part II of *Psychology of the Unconscious,* “The Conception and the Genetic Theory of Libido.” In this chapter he discusses the question, referred to in the letter quoted above, of the relationship between libido (as sexually defined by Freud in “Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality” in 1905) and the *fonction du reel* (a term used by French psychiatrist Pierre Janet for ego-consciousness). Does the latter derive from the former? If ego-consciousness is a derivative of sexually determined attachments to objects, then it would follow that disturbances of sexuality would cause disturbances in the ego, and indeed that ego disturbances could be assumed to be rooted in sexual disturbances. What Freud (and Berlin psychoanalyst Karl Abraham) wanted to argue was that the severe disturbances in the ego, in psychosis and schizophrenia, are to be attributed to the loss of sexual interest in the object world, because the reality function and attachments to objects were created by sexual interest in the first place. This is a circular argument, however, and Jung cogently points this out. In place of this, he offers another explanation for schizophrenia and psychosis, but one that would lead to a basic revision of libido theory.

Jung starts from what he calls a genetic instead of a descriptive position. He begins with a broad conception of libido as psychic energy, following Schopenhauer’s conception of Will. “As you know,” he writes somewhat apologetically to Freud, “I always have to proceed from the outside to the inside and from the whole to the part.” From this broad viewpoint, sexual libido is but one branch of the more general Will or life force. This general stream of psychic energy has several branches, and in the history of human evolution some of these branches are more prominent than others at certain points. At some stages of human development, both collective and individual, sexual libido is more prominent and fundamental; at others, it is less so.

Moreover, Jung writes, it can be argued that activities which were once closely related to sexuality and indeed could be clearly seen as derivative from the sexual instinct have become, through evolution of human consciousness and culture, separated from the sexual domain to such a great extent that they no longer have any relation to sexuality:

Thus we discover the first instincts of art in animals used in the service of the impulse of creation, and limited to the breeding season. The original sexual character of these biological institutions became lost in their organic fixation and functional independence. Even if there can be no doubt about the sexual origin of music, still it would be a poor, unaesthetic generalization if one were to include music in the category of sexuality. A similar nomenclature would then lead us to classify the cathedral of Cologne as mineralogy because it is built of stones.

It was obvious to Jung that not all expressions of psychic activity have a sexual origin or purpose, even though they may once have had such connections in the primordial history of the human race. Taking an evolutionary viewpoint, Jung then speculates about how activities that had once been sexual in meaning and intention have later become transformed into nonsexual activities, such as music and art.

## The Transformation of Psychic Energy 

How is psychic energy transformed from an expression of simple instinct, from the discharge of a powerful impulse (i.e., eating because one is hungry or copulating because one feels sexy) to cultural expressions and endeavors (i.e., haute cuisine or music making)? When do these activities leave off being “instinctual” in any meaningful sense of the word and become something else with quite different meaning and intention?

Jung argues in *Psychology of the Unconscious* that this transformation of energy may happen by virtue of the human mind’s native capacity for creating analogies. Humans have the ability, and the need, to think in metaphors, and this may lie behind this process of transformation. Thus hunting, for instance, is like *(gleich wie)* finding a sexual mate, so this analogy can be applied and used in order to generate enthusiasm and excitement about hunting. In time the activity of hunting develops its own cultural meanings and motivations and takes on a life of its own. It does not need the sexual metaphor any longer, and so sexuality does not apply to it so concretely. Yet some residues of a strong analogy always remain, and these residues allow for the possibility of reductive sexual interpretations of contemporary cultural activities.

Due to the tendency to create analogies, the human world of consciousness and culture in time becomes vastly expanded:

It appears as if, by this means of phantastic analogy formation, more libido would gradually become desexualized, because increasingly more phantasy correlates were put in the place of the primitive achievement of the sexual libido. With this an enormous broadening of the world idea was gradually developed because new objects were always assimilated as sexual symbols.

The archaic world of human activity and consciousness thus became over millennia more sexualized, but was also de-sexualized at the same time: sexualized because more analogies to sexuality were continually being created, but de-sexualized because these analogies became more and more remote from their source.

Jung’s insight was that sexual motives and thoughts are gradually replaced by metaphors, analogies, and symbols in the conscious and unconscious life of the human being. The sexual motive will reappear vividly during regressions in the patient’s mental life, however, and this is what Freud’s conceptions are based on. Up to this point in the argument, Jung is filling in detail and adding supporting arguments for the view that much of the modern human adult’s mental life derives from sexual sources even if it no longer has much to do with sexuality per se. Such differences as he shows from Freudian orthodoxy to this point would not have constituted heresy. The more critical part was to come later, in the final chapter of *Psychology of the Unconscious* entitled “The Sacrifice,” which dealt with the subject of incest.

In his autobiography, Jung recalls:

When I was working on my book about the libido and approaching the end of the chapter “The Sacrifice,” I knew in advance that its publication would cost my friendship with Freud. For I planned to set down in it my own conception of incest, the decisive transformation of the concept of libido ... To me incest signified a personal complication only in the rarest cases. Usually incest has a highly religious aspect, for which reason the incest theme plays a decisive part in almost all cosmogonies and in numerous myths. But Freud clung to the literal interpretation of it and could not grasp the spiritual significance of incest as a symbol. I knew that he would never be able to accept any of my ideas on this subject.

Why was Jung’s conception of incest “the decisive transformation of the concept of libido”? It was because he deliteralized the incest wish. Freud saw in the incest wish an unconscious wish to have the actual mother sexually in a literal sense. Jung, on the other hand, interpreted the incest wish symbolically as a general longing to remain in the paradise of childhood. This longing becomes more pronounced when a person faces a daunting challenge in life, to grow up, to adapt to a stress-filled environment. One wants to climb in bed and pull the covers over one’s head. The longed-for “mother” becomes, in Jung’s symbolic interpretation, the desire to regress to infantile dependence, to childhood, to unconsciousness and irresponsibility. This is the motivation behind much drug and alcohol addiction. When incest fantasies appeared in the treatment of neurosis, therefore, Jung would interpret them as resistances to adaptation rather than as the appearance of actual unconscious wishes or of childhood memories of such wishes. The practice of literal incest among some ancient peoples, like the Egyptian pharaohs for example, was understood by Jung to be religiously symbolic, stating a privileged status and indicating the union with a divine source of energy. It was marriage to the Mother-as-origin-of-life, not a wish-fulfillment of literal sexual desire. Actually, Jung argued, sexuality has little to do with incest. Incest is symbolically significant, not biologically desired.

This kind of symbolic interpretation of psychological themes and images set Freud’s teeth on edge. Over against his doctrines, Jung held that libido does not consist simply of sexual desire for specific objects, nor is it to be conceived as a kind of inner pressure that seeks to discharge itself by attaching to (“cathecting” is the pretentious psychoanalytic term) fixed-upon love objects. Libido is “will.” Jung is bowing to Schopenhauer here. But, Jung continues, will is divided into two parts, a will to life and a will to death: “In the first half of life [the libido’s] will is for growth, in the second half of life it hints, softly at first, and then audibly, at its will for death.” Amazingly, this reference to divided libido and to a death wish precedes Freud’s theory of a death wish by roughly a decade and owes its source most probably to Jung’s collaboration with Sabina Spielrein, who was his student at the time. It should be noted that Jung deleted this phrasing from his text when he revised it in 1952 in the work entitled *Symbols of Transformation.* By that time, he had dropped Spielrein from his theory and no longer espoused the notion of a death instinct.

The theme of sacrifice that Jung dwells upon at length in *Psychology of the Unconscious* is a centerpiece in his thoughts about the growth of consciousness and the needs of the human personality to develop maturity. Were humans to stay in bondage to incestuous desire and behavior, symbolically speaking, there would be no psychic movement out of childhood. Paradise would be home. At the same time, the human species would fail to thrive because adaptation to harsh and demanding environments could not occur. The incest wish for eternal childhood had to be sacrificed collectively in primordial times, and it has to be sacrificed individually by every modern person, in order to promote movement in consciousness toward greater consciousness. And for Jung this movement toward psychological maturity comes about naturally through internal mechanisms and dynamics. It does not have to be induced by outer threats. The great sacrifice of incest is made voluntarily, not (as taught by Freudian theory) because of threats of castration. Freud’s theory of patricide or atonement for guilt as the basis of conscience was alien to Jung’s way of thinking. Humans develop conscience, morality, and culture naturally, as part of their nature. Culture is therefore natural to the human species.

In *Psychology of the Unconscious*, Jung argues the general point that the transformation of libido comes about not through a conflict between the sexual drive and external reality but rather through the intervention of a mechanism within human nature itself. This mechanism produces the sacrifice of incest for the sake of development. It can be seen at work in many religions, notably in Mithraism and Christianity, which Jung compares here at some length.

At this point in his career, Jung had not yet conceptualized the archetype as a force that structures the psyche and psychic energy. This would come later and would then allow him to achieve much greater specificity in tracing the various transformations within the instinctual base. When he produced the extensive revision of the 1912—13 text in 1952, published as *Symbols of Transformation,* he inserted archetypal theory in many places in order to achieve precisely this type of specification. In 1913, however, he was limited theoretically and could only speak vaguely about the notion that there is a natural movement toward sacrifice of instinctual gratification, innate to the human psychic system, without which culture and human consciousness as we know it would not be possible. Sacrifice accounts for the transformation of energy from one form of expression and activity to another, but it remained unclear at that time what motivates humans to make such extraordinary sacrifices. Furthermore, there is the question of what directs energy along particular pathways to specific occupations and endeavors. A key insight would be the capacity for *symbols* to transform and direct libido.

In taking the position on instinct and libido that he did, Jung knew that his days as Freud’s heir and crown prince were numbered. Freud was not one to tolerate wide differences of opinion among his followers. Authority was at stake here, and Freud would demand an intellectual kowtow. Jung balked on this point, and this was the psychological nub of their bitter separation.

And so it did indeed come to pass that Jung’s collegial relationship with Freud ended within months of the publication of Part II of *Psychology of the Unconscious.* The publication date was September 1912, when the material appeared in the sixth volume of *Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen*, of which Jung was the general editor. For Jung, the whole point of differing with Freud on the definition and conception of libido was to avoid his severe type of reductionism that considers every manifestation of conscious life and cultural activity to be assignable to sexuality in one or another of its variety of flavors. For Freud, the point of insisting on the centrality of sexuality was to retain the edge of psychoanalytic insight into how the civilized human being avoids truth and suffers from having to deal so deviously with sexuality. In addition, Jung was aiming for the creation of a general theory of energy and for a general psychology, while Freud was intent on burrowing ever deeper into the distortions and subterfuges of psychological life as regards sexuality and (later) destructiveness and the death wish.

By 1928, when he published “On Psychic Energy,” Jung had been thinking about this subject for twenty years. His detailed argument and references to various authorities in this essay still reflect his disagreement with Freud and psychoanalysis, but they also represent his desire to present the strongest possible case for a general view of libido as psychic energy.

## Physics as a Model 

Physics, with which Jung was not technically familiar in any great detail but which was very much in the air around him in the Zurich of the early twentieth century, provided a model for thinking about psychic energy. For Jung it was a metaphor that offered possibilities for formulating a similar set of understandings for psychic energy. Physics had constructed an elaborate theory of energy, with laws of causality, entropy, conservation of energy, transformation, and so on. Looking to these laws of physics and leaving out the mathematical formulas and equations, Jung set out to conceptualize the psyche in a manner that reminds one somewhat of his earlier work in experimental psychology with the Word Association Experiment. Jung points out that when dealing with energy one is drawn to quantification.

Energy is an abstraction from the object world, he writes. One cannot see, touch, or taste it. To speak of energy is to be concerned with the relation between objects rather than with the objects themselves. Gravity, for example, describes the way one object affects another but says nothing specifically about the quality of the objects in question. Similarly, Jung argues, a theory of psychic energy, or libido, should account for how objects in the psychic world affect one another.

Jung argues that energy is finalistic and has to do with the transfer of motion or momentum among (psychic) objects as they move irreversibly along a gradient and end up in a state of equilibrium. This resembles a description of a physical chain of events: as one object bumps into another, the first is slowed and the momentum of the second is increased. The law of conservation of energy is applied to this sequence, which says that energy can neither be created nor destroyed, so the amount of energy that leaves the first object must equal the amount of energy received by the second. This can be precisely measured. Thus, while energy is abstract and intangible, its effects are observable, as anyone who plays pool knows. Jung applied this model to the psyche, and this essay is about measuring psychic energy and thinking about psychic life in terms of energy transfers and movements.

“Empathy leads to the mechanistic view, abstraction to the energic view,” Jung writes, and goes on to contrast a mechanistic with an energic view of physical and psychic reality. The perspectives are incompatible, yet both are true. “The causal-mechanistic view sees the sequence of facts, a-b-c-d, as follows: a causes b, b causes c, and so on,” its focus being on causation. This ball hits a second one, which hits the third. The first collision causes an effect, which causes another effect, and so on. Effects are thus traced back to an initial cause. “Here the concept of effect appears as the designation of a quality, as a ‘virtue’ of the cause, in other words, as a dynamism.” Applying this perspective to psychological life, a complex is seen as caused by a trauma. The force of the trauma enters the psychic system, causing a series of effects that continue to manifest for many years in the form of symptoms. From a mechanistic perspective, the trauma is regarded as the causal origin of the complex. And this understanding leads to empathy for the traumatized one.

“The *final-energic* view, on the other hand,” Jung writes, “sees the sequence thus: *a-b-c* are means towards the transformation of energy, which flows causelessly from *a,* the improbable state, entropically to *b-c* and so to the probable state *d*. Here a causal effect is totally disregarded, since only intensities of effect are taken into account. Insofar as the intensities are the same, we could just as well put *w-x-y-z* instead of *a-b-c-d.”* From a final-energic point of view, energy is transferred from a less probable to a more probable state by moving along a gradient of intensities until it ends up in equilibrium. Applying that perspective to psychological life—and here one comes to understand why Jung called this an abstract and not an empathic view—wherever one ends up in life, psychologically or emotionally speaking, is where the intensity of gradients has led in order to achieve a state of equilibrium. Equilibrium is the aim, and in that sense it is the cause, a final cause, that draws a chain of events to itself. It is a “just so” story. Causation seems like personal destiny.

For whatever reason—whether pushed from the behind or drawn forward to a goal in the future—energy moves. According to the physical law of entropy, energy flows from higher to lower levels, from less to more probable states of intensity; according to the law of negentropy, on the other hand, it moves toward states of greater complexity. The energic viewpoint sees the final state as the most important fact, while the mechanistic-causal perspective focuses on the initial impetus that sent energy into the system in the first place. Neither perspective finds outcomes to be random or unpredictable. And both are potentially scientific.

It should be noted that Jung is not dealing here with questions of ultimate purpose or meaning. Often accused of being a mystic, he was especially sensitive to the dangers of projecting purpose and meaning into natural processes. He does not regard the final-energic view as teleological, in the religious sense of natural and historical processes aiming for and seeking a meaningful spiritual conclusion. He is simply speaking here of a viewpoint that observes the transfer of energy from less probable to more probable states. Questions like: Is there a designer behind the design? Does God control and guide energy and lead it to preordained conclusions and goals? are interesting metaphysically, but Jung did not wish to address such issues here. He is merely speaking of the transfer of energy from one level to another.

While his psychological theory is finalistic in important ways, Jung also tried to create a synthesis between causal and final perspectives. He thought that the disagreement between Freud and Adler could be attributed to the difference between a causal and a finalistic psychology. While Freud’s psychology (extroverted) searches out causes, Adler’s finalistic psychology (introverted) looks at end points. Adler assumed that a person’s present life situation, no matter what it might be, was constructed to fit the individual’s personal needs and preferences in some way. Adler’s finalistic-energic view conflicted absolutely with Freud’s mechanistic-causal position. Jung was looking for a middle ground, for a position that could take both perspectives into account.

Causal-mechanistic models and finalistic models begin with a different premise concerning original energy states. The causal-mechanistic model starts with an assumption of original stasis. At the beginning nothing has happened yet, and nothing will happen until something intervenes from outside the system and gives it a boost of energy. Someone gives a ball a shove, it hits another, and so a chain of events is set in motion. The finalistic-energic position, on the other hand, assumes a highly energized state at the beginning, and from this there emerge patterns of movement as energy seeks more probable states, finally achieving balance and stasis. Complexes—Jung would say, for example—possess a specific quantum of energy, and this can result in movement if the psychic system is in disequilibrium. Complexes are not only reactive, then, but at times they can also be creative. If complexes were not proactive and creative but only reactive, they could not be considered autonomous in any strong sense of the word. Under certain conditions, they will press into ego consciousness with a fantasy or a desire or thought that is quite unprovoked by the environment. The environmental stimulus simply invites or releases the energy that is bound up in the complex. Finalistically seen, the complex would be seen as seeking to discharge its energy and to return to a lower energy level. It does this by introducing into the conscious subject a thought, a feeling or mood, or fantasy, and this may lead the person to behave in a certain way. When the discharge of energy has been completed, it settles back to a more latent state in the unconscious and awaits either the build-up of more energy from within the intrapsychic system or constellation by an outer stimulus.

## The Source of Energy 

In the essay “On Psychic Energy,” Jung does not go into detail on the specific sources of a complex’s energy. He states only that psychic energy gets distributed among the various components of the psyche, and he is interested in studying how, using the energic viewpoint, one can track the distribution of energy from one state to another. His questions are: How does energy move about within the psyche? Why are some complexes more energized than others, or sometimes more energized than at other times? How does instinctual energy, which has its source in the biological base of the psyche, get transformed into other activities?

A complex collects new psychic energy to itself in two ways: from new traumas that become associated with it and enrich it with more material, and from the magnetic power of its archetypal core. This core attracts its energy from two sources. It is fed with energy on the one hand by the instinct with which it is affiliated. Instincts and archetypes are two sides of a single coin in the psyche, as I will discuss in detail in the next chapter. The archetypal image, therefore, acts as an attractor of energy as it becomes available to the psyche from the biological base (through a process that Jung calls *psychization).* On the other hand, archetypes also attract energy from other sources. They tune into culture, to exchanges with other people, even to spirit itself, as Jung will say in his later essay, “On the Nature of the Psyche.” The psyche is by no means a closed system. Rather it is open to the world through the body and through the spirit.

The irruption of a complex into consciousness indicates that it has become temporarily more energized than the ego. Its energy flows from the complex into the ego system and may flood and possess it. Whether or not the ego can manage to contain this influx of energy is an important practical question. How can the ego channel and use what at times seems like a tremendous flood of unruly energy? The key lies with the ego, which can choose, if it is strong and determined enough, to direct this influx of energy into the creation of structure, boundaries, or projects, for example. Otherwise a person may simply become emotionally overwrought and dysfunctional.

For Jung, then, the psyche was not conceived as a closed energy system. Closed systems move toward entropy, and absolutely closed systems stabilize in a totally static final state. Jung believed that the psychic system is only relatively closed. The healthy psyche is somewhat closed and does show a tendency toward entropy, but it is also open in that it is fed and influenced by the surrounding world. Tightly closed psychic systems are pathological. Those are often so sealed off from outer influences that they do not yield to psychotherapy. Paranoid schizophrenia, for instance, is such a tightly locked psychic system, and it ends in total stasis with rigidly frozen ideas and attitudes and increased isolation. Only biological treatment can influence it.

In a healthy personality, psychic energy also follows the law of entropy to some extent. Over time there is a tendency toward conservatism and gradual stasis. Change becomes more difficult as one ages. The polarities in the psyche, which generate energy through their vigorous interaction, approach a position of stability and accommodation. This fact would indicate that the normal psychic system is only relatively open and somewhat closed. Energy distribution tends to move from high to lower levels, analogous to water falling to the lowest level it can reach.

## Measurement of Psychic Energy 

Jung wonders in this essay how such energy states could be measured scientifically. He suggests that this could be done by estimating *values*. The amount of value placed on an attitude or activity indicates the intensity level of energy. Quantifying that, however, presents difficulties. If one were to make an inventory of one’s conscious contents and preoccupations—politics, religion, money, sex, career, relationships, family—and put an estimate of value on each item, using a scale of 1 to 100, one would have a sense of how energy is distributed among the contents of consciousness. Obviously this fluctuates day by day, year by year, decade by decade. And how does one really know how much something is valued by the psyche? It is easy to fool oneself. An inventory of conscious contents can be rated on a scale, but one cannot be certain of the accuracy of these ratings until they are put to the test. Only when choices are forced between two or more attractive things does a person actually become certain of what the relative values are. An alcoholic who is forced to choose between more boozing and a wife and family will be hard pressed to commit himself, but such a crisis will test his promise never to drink again. Spending habits can provide important clues to one’s actual, as opposed one’s supposed, values. The flow of money, which symbolizes energy, is a way of showing where value intensity lies. People voluntarily spend money for what they value highly.

These are some of the ways in which the energy values of conscious contents can be measured. But what about the values of unconscious contents? How can these be measured? This cannot be accomplished by introspection alone because the ego cannot ordinarily penetrate far enough into the unconscious depths. Complexes will make choices that the ego would not make. An indirect method of measurement is necessary, and for Jung the Word Association Experiment provided such a method. A complex’s energy level is indicated by the number of complex indicators associated to it. Once this is known, an estimate can be made of its energy potential. Over time, too, one learns experientially which complexes generate the most intense emotional reactions. These sensitive areas are better not exposed in public and in polite society because of one’s predictably intense reactions. Some collective complexes, circling around issues of sex, religion, money, or power affect almost everyone to some degree and can lead to fierce discharges of energy, even to war, if provoked severely enough. The intensity and frequency of disturbances in daily life are useful indicators of the energy levels of the unconscious complexes. The energy level of a psychic content may be indicated by either positive or negative emotions and reactions. From an energic point of view, this distinction in feeling makes no difference.

## The Unity of Body and Mind 

Psychic energy—Jung repeats in this essay what he said some fifteen years earlier in *Psychology of the Unconscious*—is a subcategory of life energy. Some people simply have a great deal of it, while others have less. It was said that Lyndon Johnson, for example, seemed to have more glands than anybody else around. He could overwhelm people with his sheer energy. As a senator, he wrote 250 letters a day to constituents while carrying out his regular duties as majority leader. Some people have a tremendous amount of raw energy while others can barely get from bed to the breakfast table. In a sense, the physical side of life strongly affects the psychological, and feeling healthy physically contributes to one’s reservoir of psychic energy. But the relation between psyche and body is complex and often paradoxical. Nietzsche, for example, was extremely ill and in severe pain while writing his poetic masterpiece, Also *Sprach Zarathustra.* Heinrich Heine spent the last ten years of his life in bed in physical agony, and yet he composed hundreds of songs and poems and other literary works of the highest caliber during this period. The immense amounts of psychic energy needed for these efforts of genius cannot be accounted for by using the simple notion that a healthy body produces the psychic energy that is available for work. There is more going on than a simple transfer of calories from soma to soul and mind.

Because of conundrums such as these, some thinkers have regarded the physical and psychological as two relatively independent parallel systems. This has the virtue of preserving the integrity of each system and denying the reduction of psychic energy to physical energy. But Jung was not content with that model, even while he strongly opposed biological reductionism. He affirmed that there are two systems, but their interaction is so intricate and complex, and for the most part buried so deeply in the unconscious, that it is difficult to define where one begins and the other leaves off. In some ways they are independent, but in others they are deeply interconnected and seem dependent on one another. The mind/body issue appears many times in Jung’s writings, and I will touch on it again in later chapters. In the essay “On Psychic Energy” he merely alludes to the problem.

Since the psyche-soma unity is only a relatively and not an absolutely closed system, neither entropy nor conservation of energy operates in it precisely. Practically speaking, however, there is a strong correlation. If one’s interest in one thing diminishes or vanishes, that same amount of energy often appears somewhere else. The two objects of interest might not be related in any apparent way, but the total amount of energy in the system remains constant. On the other hand, a great deal of energy sometimes vanishes completely. A person becomes lethargic or depressed. In this instance, Jung says, the energy has gone into regression. It has drained out of consciousness and returned to the unconscious.

## Energy, Movement, and Direction 

*Regression* and *progression* of libido are important terms in Jung’s theory. They refer to directions of energy movement. In progression, libido is utilized for adaptation to life and the world. The person uses it for functioning in the world and can spend it freely on chosen activities. This person is experiencing a positive flow of psychic energy. But suppose this person fails an important exam, or gets shunted aside in a corporate shake-up, or loses a beloved mate or a child. Progression of libido may come to a stop, life ceases its forward momentum, and the flow of energy reverses direction. It goes into regression and disappears into the unconscious, where it activates complexes. This may lead to splitting apart polarities that were once linked; they now become warring opposites. Now ego-consciousness may have one set of principles and values, while the unconscious takes up a contrary position. The person is torn by inner conflict and becomes paralyzed. During progression, the polarities within the self balance each other and generate energy that moves forward. One may be ambivalent, but in a way that is adaptive to reality. In regression, on the other hand, the flow of energy goes back into the psychic system and becomes unavailable for adaptation. When the polarities come apart, a severe kind of ambivalence develops that paralyzes life. A standstill ensues, yes and no cancel each other out, and one cannot move.

Jung noted that when energy is not spent adapting to the world and is not moving in a progressive way, it activates the complexes and increases their energy potential in the degree to which the ego loses available energy. This is the law of conservation of energy as it applies to the psyche. The energy does not disappear from the system but rather disappears from consciousness. And this results typically in states of depression, crippling ambivalence, internal conflict, uncertainty, doubt, questioning, and loss of motivation.

While progression fosters adaptation to the world, regression leads paradoxically to new possibilities for development. Regression activates the inner world. When the inner world has been activated, a person is forced to deal with it and later to make a new adaptation to life that takes the results into account. That movement toward inner adaptation eventually leads to a fresh outer adaptation when the libido once again begins moving in the direction of progression. But now the person is more mature precisely because of the confrontation with the unconscious—the complexes, personal history, foibles, faults, and all the other troublesome and painful issues that surface during regression. (I will discuss Jung’s concept of individuation in greater detail in chapter 8.)

It should be noted that Jung makes a clear distinction between the progression and regression of libido on the one hand and the attitudes of extroversion and introversion on the other. It is easy for the beginner to confuse them. Introverts progress in their own way, adapting to the world in an introverted fashion, while extroverts progress in an extroverted way. The same holds true for regression. For example, an extroverted-thinking type person, who has habitually used thinking to deal with the world and to manipulate people, comes up against a situation in life where that function does not work very effectively and experiences defeat. Relationship problems cannot as a rule be solved by extroverted thinking. Here a totally different approach is needed. When this person’s superior function is rendered useless, a sense of frustration and defeat takes over, for now suddenly other functions are demanded and these are not readily available. So the libido regresses and typically activates the inferior function, in this case the introverted-feeling function. As Jung pointed out, the inferior function is unconscious and carries the slime of the murky depths with it when it comes up into consciousness. An integrated-feeling function is a tool of the ego and is a refined, discriminating and rational function that orients one by establishing values. An inferior, undifferentiated feeling function surging up from the unconscious, however, provides only a small amount of guidance about values, but rather screams in bright red letters: “This is the most important thing in my whole life! I cannot live without it!” It is highly emotional. The inferior function’s lack of adaptive skill is generally all too evident, but the ego is challenged to use the emotions and thoughts that come into consciousness in this fashion, and by doing so it begins the task of adapting to the hidden side of the personality, the unconscious.

By contrast, people who get a lot of mileage in the first half of their lives out of their ability to relate well to other people reach a point where this no longer satisfies them. The highly developed extroverted-feeling function does not feed the soul anymore. Other potentials demand to be realized. Perhaps introverted intuitive-thinking projects (studying philosophy or theology) beckon and seem more attractive than another luncheon with friends or one more family gathering over the holidays. The full human life span has many periods of significant transformation.

## Transformations and Symbols 

How such transformations occur was a deep and abiding concern of Jung’s. In the essay “On Psychic Energy” he provides a formal theoretical account of transformation. In the section on *canalization of libido*, he considers some natural *gradients* of energy. A gradient is a pathway along which energy flows. In the state of nature—that is, in the paradisal state as we imagine it—no work as such is required or gets done. Like the pet dog who lives in a comfortable home, sleeps a lot, begs for table scraps, and (if not neutered) engages in seasonal frenetic sexual activities, so a human being living purely in the state of nature would live by physical instinct and desire alone. But humans have created culture and have specialized in work, and this presupposes the ability to channel energy out of the natural gradients into other, seemingly artificial pathways. How does this happen?

Jung does not conceive of nature and culture as diametrically opposed to one another. Rather, he regards them both as belonging to human nature in a fundamental way. The human inventions of culture and specialization in work come about by means of the mind’s creation of analogues to instinctual goals and activities. Such analogues function as symbols. Ideas and images—mental contents—channel libido in new directions by diverting it from its natural gradient and objects. For example, an idea arises in the young child that is as appealing as the image of the breast. This idea, realized in play, draws more energy to itself than does the breast and allows the child to delay gratifying the urge to nurse and eventually to wean spontaneously. In later life, the analogue or symbol that replaces the breast may be a gourmet meal. The thought of enjoying *haute cuisine* offers the same type of soothing to the adult as the image of the full breast offers to the small child. An idea or a cultural object thus captures the energy that would otherwise have remained fixated on the breast of the mother. Both breast and restaurant are symbols for something that at that moment in psychological development can be expressed in no better way.

A *symbol* attracts a great deal of energy to itself and shapes the ways in which psychic energy is channeled and spent. Religions have traditionally attracted large amounts of human energy, and they rely for their power almost exclusively on symbols. Through their use of symbols they also become powerful politically and economically, but these powers are secondary to the symbolic one which undergirds them. Remove the symbolic power and the whole edifice collapses. When vibrant and alive, religious ideas and rituals have tremendous attractive power to pull human energy into certain activities and preoccupations. Why does the symbol have a steeper gradient than the natural object? How can an idea become more interesting and compelling to human beings than instinctively attractive objects like breasts or penises?

Jung knew well enough that this does not come about because of a decision taken by the ego. When “Bill W.” (William G. Wilson), cofounder of Alcoholics Anonymous, wrote to Jung in 1961 and reported on Roland H’s fate (a patient Jung had treated for alcoholism in the early 1930s), Jung responded by admitting that the therapist is essentially helpless in trying to overcome a patient’s substance dependence. Jung’s message was—in my paraphrase of his *letter—You need a symbol, an analogue that will draw the energy that has gone into drinking. You must find an equivalent that is more interesting than getting drunk every night, that attracts your interest more than that bottle of vodka.* A powerful symbol is required to bring about such a major transformation in an alcoholic, and Jung spoke of the need for a conversion experience. Symbols emerge out of the archetypal base of the personality, the collective unconscious. They are not artificially invented by the ego but rather appear spontaneously from the unconscious especially during times of great need.

Symbols are the great organizers of libido. Jung’s use of the term symbol is precise. A symbol is not a sign. Signs can be read and interpreted with no loss of meaning. A stop sign means “stop!” But a symbol is, in Jung’s understanding, the best possible statement or expression for something that is either essentially unknowable or not yet knowable given the present state of consciousness. Interpretations of symbols are attempts to translate the symbol’s meaning into a more understandable vocabulary and set of terms, but the symbol remains the best present expression of the meaning it communicates. Symbols open one up to mystery. And they also combine elements of spirit and instinctuality, of image and drive. For that reason, descriptions of exalted spiritual states and mystical experiences frequently refer to physical and instinctual gratifications like nourishment and sexuality. Mystics talk about the ecstasy of uniting with God as an orgasmic experience, and most likely it is. The experience of the symbol unites body and soul in a powerful, convincing feeling of wholeness. For Jung the symbol holds so much importance because of its ability to transform natural energy into cultural and spiritual forms. In this essay he does not discuss the timing of such symbolic emergences in the psyche. This is considered in other writings, importantly in the late work entitled “Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle.”

The difference between transformation and sublimation spells out a basic distinction between the theories of Jung and Freud. For Freud, civilized human beings are able to sublimate libidinal desires, but sublimation only produces substitutes for the true objects of such desire. Libido will attach to the substitutes, but these remain only second best. In reality, the libido wishes to return to early childhood, to mother and father fixations, to Oedipal fantasy fulfillment. Freud’s analysis, therefore, was always reductive. Jung agreed that the libido originally seeks the mother’s body because nurturance is essential for the baby’s survival. Later, the libido is drawn into sexual channels and flows along those gradients: procreation is necessary for the survival of the species. But when the libido finds a spiritual analogue, an idea or image, it will go there because that is its goal, not because this is a substitute for sexual fulfillment. For Jung, this is a transformation of libido, and culture arises from such transformations. Culture is a fulfillment of desire, not an obstruction of it. Jung is convinced that the nature of the human being leads to culture formation, to the creation of symbols, to containment of energy so that its flow can be directed toward these spiritual and mental contents.
