# The Psyche’s Boundaries: Instincts, Archetypes, and the Collective Unconscious

Before modern times mapmakers put a distinctive stamp on their works. You could identify a map by certain unique features that pointed to the hand of its creator. It was a work of art as well as a work of science. Up to this point, Jung’s map of the soul does not look so different from other depth psychological accounts. With this chapter, however, we begin studying its truly unique features. It was Jung’s exploration and account of what he called the *collective unconscious* that gave his work its most distinctive style.

To pick up where we left off in the preceding chapter on psychic energy, I will simply state that for Jung the archetype is a primary source of psychic energy and patterning. It constitutes the ultimate source of psychic symbols, which attract energy, structure it, and lead ultimately to the creation of civilization and culture. From hints in earlier chapters, it should be somewhat evident that the theory of archetypes is critical to Jung’s overall conception of the psyche. In fact, it is the foundation.

A discussion of Jung’s theory of archetypes, however, also means that we must take up his theory of instincts as well. Archetype and instinct are profoundly related, in Jung’s view. For Jung, mind and body are so interrelated that they are nearly inseparable. If this is ignored, the discussion of archetypal images easily slips into an overly spiritualized and groundless psychology. To discuss the archetype from a psychological standpoint rather than from a philosophical or metaphysical one, one must ground it in life as lived in the human body, where it also becomes intertwined with personal history and psychological development. The theory of archetypes is what makes Jung’s map of the soul Platonic, but the difference between Jung and Plato is that Jung studied the Ideas as psychological factors and not as eternal forms or abstractions.

As I said at the outset of this book, Jung was intent on exploring the psyche to its furthest boundaries. If he was not a systematic thinker, he was certainly an ambitious one, and his ambition pushed him to press on beyond the bounds of scientific knowledge in his time. Science is still catching up with many of his intuitions. Probing ever further into the dark unknown terrain of the mind, he made some of his most original contributions to psychology and psychoanalysis in his theory of a collective unconscious and its contents. It is sometimes asked whether what he described as psychic facts are discoveries or inventions. But this is the fate of the mapmaker when the continents he is outlining are brand new and still wholly unknown and unexplored. The early mapmaker is forced to draw on intuition and to risk guesswork. He also consults the maps of others and even studies ancient texts. These can be helpful, or they can be misleading. Jung was more than adequately aware of the pitfalls in this enterprise, and he was as cautious in formulating his speculations as he was adventurous in allowing himself to have them in the first place.

For this chapter, I will refer mainly to Jung’s late summation of theory, the classic paper “On the Nature of the Psyche.” This essay does not depict the realm of the collective unconscious in the florid manner of grand images that Jung was so fond of in other works, particularly in his late works using the images and texts of alchemy. This is a sober and abstract theoretical account, rather difficult to read and dry to the taste of those who look to Jung for visionary inspiration. But this work supplies the theoretical bedrock on which those other formulations rest, and without understanding this basic theory the rest can look much like a collection of animals in a well-stocked zoo: a lot of exotic color but not much rationale. The critics who read Jung in this way frankly do not understand the nature of his project. The rationale for his collections of abstruse and exotic facts is given in many places, but with special clarity in this theoretical paper.

This essay was written in 1945—46 and revised in 1954. I consider it arguably Jung’s most comprehensive and synthetic theoretical work. A full understanding of this work actually requires extensive knowledge of all of Jung’s previous writings. It presents little that is new in his thinking but rather pulls together many threads that have been dropped in numerous essays from the prior three decades. A brief review of the thinking that led up to this classic paper is in order and will provide the context for understanding its importance.

Jung’s ambition from very early on was to participate in the creation of a general psychology that would map the psyche from its highest to its lowest dimensions, its closest to its farthest reaches, truly a map of the soul. This ambition can be traced back into the early years of his career. In a letter written in 1913 to editors Smith Ely Jelliffe and William Alanson White of the newly founded *Psychoanalytical Review* and published in the first issue of that journal, Jung offers a sketch of his bold vision for this new psychology. He applauds the editors on their plan to “unite in their journal the contributions of competent specialists in various fields.” The fields he cites as being relevant and useful to psychology are, amazingly, philology, history, archaeology, mythology, folklore studies, ethnology, philosophy, theology, pedagogy, and biology! If all of these contribute their specialized knowledge to the study of the human psyche, Jung writes, there will be a chance of reaching “the distant goal of a genetic psychology, which will clear our eyes for medical psychology, just as comparative anatomy has already done in regard to the structure and function of the human body.” Jung speaks in this letter also of a “comparative anatomy of the mind,” which would be achieved by pooling expertise from many fields of research and study. His goal was to achieve a broad overview of the psyche and to grasp it as a whole, from which one could observe the various parts in their dynamic interplay.

As Jung penetrated more deeply into the sources of the unconscious material—primarily dreams and fantasies—presented by his patients and discovered in his own inner work on himself, he was led to theorize about some general structures of the human mind, structures that belong to everyone and not only to himself or to the individual patient before him. The deepest layer of the human psyche he named the “collective unconscious” and conceived of its contents as a combination of universally prevalent patterns and forces called “archetypes” and “instincts.” In his view, there is nothing individual or unique about human beings at this level. Everyone has the same archetypes and instincts. For uniqueness one must look elsewhere in the personality. True individuality, he argued in *Psychological Types* and *Two Essays in Analytical Psychology*, is the product of a personal struggle for consciousness that he called the individuation process (see chapter 8). Individuation is the flower of a person’s conscious engagement with the paradox of the psyche over an extended period of time. Instincts and archetypes, on the other hand, are nature’s gift to each of us. They are given equally to one and all, and everyone shares them whether rich or poor, black or white, ancient or modern. This theme of universality is a basic feature of Jung’s understanding of the human psyche. He gave it succinct expression late in life in the revision of a work entitled “The Father in the Destiny of the Individual”:

Man “possesses” many things which he has never acquired but has inherited from his ancestors. He is not born as a *tabula rasa,* he is merely born unconscious. But he brings with him systems that are organized and ready to function in a specifically human way, and these he owes to millions of years of human development. Just as the migratory and nest-building instincts of birds were never learnt or acquired individually, man brings with him at birth the ground-plan of his nature, and not only of his individual nature but of his collective nature. These inherited systems correspond to the human situations that have existed since primeval times: youth and old age, birth and death, sons and daughters, father and mothers, mating, and so on. Only the individual consciousness experiences these things for the first time, but not the bodily system and the unconscious. For them they are only the habitual functioning of instincts that were preformed long ago.

## Archetypes (Psychic Universals)

The origin of Jung’s notion of archetypes can be traced back in his written works to the period between 1909 and 1912 when, while still collaborating with Freud, he was investigating mythology and writing *Psychology of the Unconscious.* In that work he studied the fantasies of Miss Frank Miller, which had been made publicly available in a book published by his friend and colleague from Geneva, Gustav Flournoy. Jung wanted to explore the significance of these fantasies from his newly emerging point of view, which had been incubating since his early psychiatric study of his mediumistic cousin, Helene Preiswerk. His engagement with Frank Miller’s fantasy materials became the occasion for Jung to begin distancing himself explicitly from Freud’s libido theory and to start discussing general patterns in what he would later come to call the collective unconscious.

According to his autobiography, Jung got his first impression of impersonal layers of the unconscious from a dream he had during the voyage to America with Freud in 1909. He dreamed of a house (called “my house” in the context of the dream) that had many levels. In the dream he explores the storeys of the house from the main floor (the present age) down into the basement (the recent historical past) and beyond that down through several sub-cellars (the ancient historical past, like the Greek and Roman, and finally the prehistoric and Paleolithic past). This dream answered a question he had been asking during the trip, namely: “On what premises is Freudian psychology founded? To what category of human thought does it belong?” The dream image, he writes, “became for me a guiding image” for how to conceive of psychic structure. “It was my first inkling of a collective a priori beneath the personal psyche.”

When he first examined the work of Flournoy, Jung knew little about Miss Miller or her personal life history. Perhaps this would be an advantage for theory, he mused, since now his thought could not be contaminated by personal associations and projections. Undistracted by the trees, he could look at the forest. He would be free to speculate about more general psychological patterns. And speculate he did, with considerable zest and abandon. As he looked at Miss Miller’s fantasies, he imagined her reality from the few facts that were included in the account: an unmarried young woman traveling alone in Europe, attracted to an Italian sailor but unable to act upon her erotic interest, damming up unused sexual libido and falling into a profound regression. Using what he knew at the time about psychological dynamics—learned largely from Freud and fellow psychoanalysts—he also ventured to extend some of those understandings to the point of suggesting that libido, sexuality itself, has a dual nature. On the one hand, it seeks fulfillment in sexual involvement and pleasure; on the other hand, it inhibits such involvement and even seeks the opposite, death. He ventured to propose a death wish equal to the wish for life, the second becoming more prominent in the second half of life as one prepares to die. Innate to the human psyche was a tendency to sacrifice satisfaction, sexual or otherwise, and to pursue nonsexual tendencies and desires that could not be satisfied by any amount of sexual activity.

This was a strange course for Jung’s thinking to take in reflecting on the psychological situation of this young woman. On the one hand, she was obviously seeking an erotic outlet in life and was not able to find one. Hence her regressions and attempts at sublimation: visions, poetry writing, daydreaming, all of which, Jung felt, showed evidence of premorbidity and could eventually lead to mental illness. On the other hand, perhaps Miss Miller’s sexual inhibitions reflected a deeper conflict within her psyche, a conflict that one could see as generally human and indeed archetypal. There was the much larger issue of the whole course of human evolution and development, and Jung was theorizing that sexual libido had in the course of eons of human evolution been channeled into pathways of culture through metaphors and likenesses at first and then into deeper transformations. These could no longer be adequately defined in the least as sexual. He was arriving at a whole new theory of culture while tracing the libido fluctuations of Miss Miller. It is no wonder that many readers have found this book confusing.

As Jung explored human evolution, drawing many parallels between what was going on in a sort of morbid way with Miss Miller and what had happened hundreds and thousands and indeed hundreds of thousands of years in the past, he outlined the constellation of the hero myth and assigned to the hero the role of creating consciousness. The hero is a basic human pattern—characteristic of women equally as of men—that demands sacrificing the “mother,” meaning a passive childish attitude, and assuming the responsibilities of life and meeting reality in a grown up way. The hero archetype demands leaving off with childish fantasy thinking and insists on engaging reality in an active way. If humans had not been able to take up this challenge, they would have been doomed eons ago. In order to meet reality consistently, though, a tremendous sacrifice of desire and wistful longing for the comforts of childhood is demanded. This was Miss Miller’s dilemma: she was confronted with the task of growing up and meeting her adult roles in life, and she was shrinking from the challenge. She was not leaving fantasy thinking behind, and she was getting lost in a morbid unreal world that was relatively unrelated to her reality. She was in a massive regression to the “mother,” and the question was: Would she get stuck there, like Theseus in Hades, and never return? Jung was not so sure, but he guessed she might fall into psychosis.

As he worked on these fantasies of Frank Miller, Jung brought together a host of related myths, fairy tales, and religious motifs from remote corners of the world to interpret her images. He was awestruck by these amazing parallels, and his mind groped for an explanation of why this woman had spontaneously produced images and themes resembling those of Egyptian mythology, of the aboriginal tribes of Australia, and of the native peoples of America. Why do such striking parallels occur to the human mind without much seeming effort? What does this mean? He connected these facts to his dream of the descending basements, and thus he began to realize that he was discovering evidence for the existence of a collective layer of the unconscious. This would mean that there is material in the unconscious that has not been put there by repression from consciousness. It is there to begin with.

The same pursuit of psychic universals, it must be noted, also intrigued Freud, but in quite a different way. Freud was looking for a single unconscious wish—a central complex—that would explain all psychic conflict, and he thought he had found it in the story of the primal horde. While Jung was writing *Psychology of the Unconscious,* Freud was working on *Totem and Taboo.* With clinical material in one hand and Frazer’s *Golden Bough* in the other, Freud was pursuing a project similar to Jung’s, and the race was on as to who would make the Great Discovery first. Whether Freud’s or Jung’s version is preferred, the common denominator is that the human mind has universal structures, just like the human body, and these can be discovered through an interpretive and comparative method.

In one sense, then, Freud, like Jung, produced a theory of archetypes. His notion of archaic residues acknowledged ancient patterns. While Freud’s attitude toward this material was very different from Jung’s discussions of mythology and its relation to the psyche, the two men were nevertheless following similar lines of thought and reaching for a similar conclusion.

## The Unconscious

The parallels Jung found between images and myths of individuals and groups in unrelated historical periods and locations intensified his quest for an explanation. Is there a common point of origin for psychotic images, dream images, and personal fantasy productions on the one hand, and collective mythical and religious images and thoughts on the other? Jung was exploring commonalities in human thinking and imagining. In order to carry this research further, he had to get his patients to reveal their unconscious fantasies and thoughts.

In his paper “On the Nature of the Psyche,” Jung tells how he activated fantasy activity in his patients: “I had often observed patients whose dreams pointed to a rich store of fantasy material. Equally, from the patients themselves, I got the impression that they were stuffed full of fantasies, without being able to tell me just where the inner pressure lay. I therefore took up a dream image or an association of the patient’s, and, with this as a point of departure, set him the task of elaborating or developing his theme by giving free rein to his fantasy.” Freud’s technique of free association had been similar, but Jung let imagination roam further and more freely. He encouraged his patients to elaborate fantasy material: “This, according to individual taste and talent, could be done in any number of ways, dramatic, dialectic, visual, acoustic, or in the form of dancing, painting, drawing, or modeling. The result of this technique was a vast number of complicated designs whose diversity puzzled me for years, until I was able to recognize that in the method I was witnessing the spontaneous manifestation of an unconscious process which was merely assisted by the technical ability of the patient, and to which I later gave the name ‘individuation process.’” This process of imaging unconscious contents brings them into conscious form.

The chaotic assortment of images that at first confronted me reduced itself in the course of the work to certain well-defined themes and formal elements, which repeated themselves in identical or analogous form with the most varied individuals. I mention, as the most salient characteristics, chaotic multiplicity and order; duality, the opposition of light and dark, upper and lower, right and left; the union of opposites in a third; the quaternity (square, cross); rotation (circle, sphere); and finally the centring process and a radial arrangement that usually followed some quaternary system.... The centring process is, in my experience, the never-to-be-surpassed climax of the whole development, and is characterized as such by the fact that it brings with it the greatest possible therapeutic effect.

Jung goes on to speak about “formative principles [that] are unconscious.” In addition to his consideration of the fantasy material produced by psychotics, Jung’s experience with neurotic patients encouraged him to think that major formative elements exist within the unconscious. Since ego consciousness does not determine this process, the source of the forms that appear must lie somewhere else. Some forms might be determined by complexes, but others are more primordial and impersonal and cannot be accounted for by individual life experience.

Jung presented this paper in 1946 at the Eranos Conference at Ascona, Switzerland, where many of his major essays were given and which he attended from its inception in 1933 until 1960, the year before his death. Here people gathered annually from all over the world. Their interests lay particularly in psychology and religion, especially Eastern religions. Olga Froebe-Kapetyn, the founder whose longstanding serious interest in Eastern thought and all kinds of occultism had motivated the undertaking, brought together renowned experts to discuss various topics. This audience seemed truly to stimulate Jung and to draw out his best efforts. These people were members of a world class community of scientists and scholars, and they demanded papers of extremely high quality.

“On the Nature of the Psyche” is a mature summation of Jung’s psychological theory. The historical sections of the paper deal with the unconscious in philosophy and academic psychology. Here Jung lays the groundwork for his own definitions of the unconscious, for his understanding of its relation to consciousness, and for intrapsychic dynamics. The notion of an unconscious is fundamental to all depth psychologies. This separates depth psychologies from other psychological models. As evidence for the existence of the unconscious, Jung cites the dissociability of the psyche. In certain altered states of consciousness, for example, one finds a subliminal self or subject, an inner figure who is not the ego but shows intentionality and will. The ego can enter into dialogue with this other subpersonality. Such a “Jekyll and Hyde” phenomenon indicates the presence of two distinct centers of consciousness within one personality. This also exists, Jung writes, in so-called normal personalities even if people are not aware of this fact.

But once one posits an unconscious psyche, how is one to define its limits? Can they be defined at all, or are they so indefinite as to be considered more or less limitless? As a scientist and thinker, Jung wanted some clear definitions and in this paper he proposes several of them. One of the most important is a theoretical concept called the *psychoid* aspect of the psyche, which forms a threshold:

The sound frequencies perceptible to the human ear range from 20 to 20,000 vibrations per second; the wave-lengths of light visible to the eye range from 7700 to 3900 angstrom-units. This analogy makes it conceivable that there is a lower as well as an upper threshold for psychic events, and that consciousness, the perceptual system par excellence, may therefore be compared with the perceptible scale of sound or light, having like them a lower and upper limit. Maybe this comparison could be extended to the psyche in general, which would not be an impossibility if there were ‘psychoid’ processes at both ends of the psychic scale.

Jung’s view of the psyche posits that it moves along a scale whose outer limits gradually disappear into a psychoid (that is, psyche-like) area. Jung acknowledges that he is borrowing the adjective “psychoid” from Bleuler, who defined *das Psychoide* as “the sum total of all the purposive, mnemonic, and life-preserving functions of the body and central nervous system, with the exception of those cortical functions which we have always been accustomed to regard as psychic.” Bleuler thus proposed a distinction between (a) the psychic functions, which in Jung’s terms include ego-consciousness and the unconscious (personal and collective), and (b) the other life-preserving functions of the body and the central nervous system, some of which appear to be quasi-psychic. The body itself is able to remember and to learn. For instance, once you learn to ride a bicycle, you do not need to recall this skill consciously. The body retains the memory of how to do it. The body is also purposive and oriented toward the preservation of life, struggling for survival in its own way, outside the range of the psyche. Jung works basically within this set of definitions regarding the psychic, the quasi-psychic, and the nonpsychic.

Jung uses Bleuler’s term psychoid in a number of his writings, but with some reservations. He criticizes Bleuler for unduly linking psychoid to specific bodily organs and for encouraging a kind of pan-psychism that would find psyche in everything living. Psychoid for Jung is a term that describes processes that are psyche-like or quasi-psychic but not properly so. The term is used to distinguish psychic functions from vitalistic ones. Psychoid processes lie between somatic life-energy and sheer bodily processes on the one hand and true psychic processes on the other.

## Instincts

At this point in his argument, Jung takes up the subject of human instinct. Instinct is rooted in the physical and enters the psyche as impulse, thought, memory, fantasy, and emotion. To be sure, the whole subject of instinct is a problem with regard to humans. Because humans have the ability to choose, to reflect, and to act or not to act on so-called instinctual impulses, as other animals do not, it is questionable how large a role instincts play in human behavior. Jung recognized that for humans the instinctual side of behavior is far less determinative than it is for animals. Nevertheless, people are to some degree influenced by physiological, as distinct from psychic, needs and processes. Using Janet’s term, Jung calls this the *partie inferieur* of human existence. This part is controlled by hormones and shows a compulsive character that has led some to speak of “drives.” Insofar as hormones dictate what we do or feel, we are subject to drives and instinct. The *partie inferieur,* that is, the somatic level of the psyche, is strongly influenced by bodily processes.

Having recognized this somatic substrate, Jung then states:

From these reflections it appears that the psyche is an emancipation of function from its instinctual form and so from the compulsiveness which, as sole determinant of the function, causes it to harden into a mechanism. The psychic condition or quality begins where the function loses its outer and inner determinism and becomes capable of more extensive and freer application . . .

As information moves from soma to psyche, it passes through the psychoid region, and as a result there is a considerable softening of biological determinism, which then gives way to a more “extensive and freer application ... where it begins to show itself accessible to a will motivated from other sources.” The appearance of will is decisive for establishing a function as psychic. Hunger and sexuality, for instance, are somatically-based drives that involve the release of hormones. Both are instincts. One must eat, and the body craves sexual release. But will enters the picture, since choices can be made about what is eaten or how to satisfy one’s sexual urges. Will can intervene to an extent, even if it cannot absolutely control a person’s ultimate behavior in all respects.

If there is a limit on the psyche at the somatic end of the spectrum (the *partie inferieur),* there is also a limit at the *partie superieur* of consciousness: “with increasing freedom from sheer instinct the *partie superieur* [consciousness] will ultimately reach a point at which the intrinsic energy of the function ceases altogether to be oriented by instinct in the original sense, and attains a so-called ‘spiritual’ form.” Instinct loses control over the psyche at a certain point, but other factors enter to control and orient it. These factors Jung calls “spiritual,” but the translation of the German *“geistlich”* presents a problem here. Another English adjective that could be used just as well is “mental.” These controlling factors are mental—they are of the mind, in the sense of the Greek *nous*—and they are no longer organically based. They may operate like instincts, in the sense of calling the will into action, and they may even cause the body to secrete hormones. Jung wants to tie the whole system of soma, psyche, and spirit together while preserving analytic distinctions among the various aspects.

The ego is motivated in part by instincts, in part by mental forms and images. And the ego has some freedom of choice among its various options. It enjoys an amount of “disposable libido” even if its motivations are grounded in instinct or governed by spirit. Jung, ever the biologist and medical psychologist, refused to distance himself very far from drives and instincts. Even the will, the very essence of what defines psyche, is motivated by biological drives: “the motivation of the will must in the first place be regarded as essentially biological.” The instincts lose their potency, however, at the mental end of the psychic spectrum: “at the ... upper limit of the psyche, where the function breaks free from its original goal, the instincts lose their influence as movers of the will. Through having its form altered, the function is pressed into the service of other determinants or motivations which apparently have nothing further to do with the instincts.”

What I am trying to make clear is the remarkable fact that the will cannot transgress the bounds of the psychic sphere: it cannot coerce the instinct, nor has it power over the spirit, in so far as we understand by this something more than the intellect. Spirit and instinct are by nature autonomous and both limit in equal measure the applied field of the will.

The psychoid boundary defines the gray area between the potentially knowable and the totally unknowable—the potentially controllable and the wholly uncontrollable—aspects of human functioning. This is not a sharp boundary but rather an area of transformation. The psychoid thresholds show an effect that Jung calls “psychization”: nonpsychic information becomes *psychized,* passing from the unknowable into the unknown (the unconscious psyche) and then moving toward the known (ego-consciousness). The human psychic apparatus, in short, shows a capacity to psychize material from the somatic and spiritual poles of nonpsychic reality.

If one observes psychic life concretely and clinically, it is never the case that instinctually-based drive data is totally free of mentally-based forms and images. The actual presentation is always a mixture. This is because instinct “bears in itself a pattern of its situation. Always it fulfills an image, and the image has fixed qualities.”  Instincts function very precisely because they are guided by images and shaped by patterns, which also constitute the meaning of the instinct. At this point in his essay, Jung links archetypes, the basic mental patterns, with instincts. Instincts are guided and oriented by archetypal images. On the other hand, however, archetypes can behave like instincts:

To the extent that the archetypes intervene in the shaping of conscious contents by regulating, modifying, and motivating them, they act like the instincts. It is therefore very natural to suppose that these factors [the archetypes] are connected with the instincts, and to inquire whether the typical situational patterns which these collective form-principles apparently represent are not in the end identical with the instinctual patterns, namely, with the patterns of behavior.

So closely connected are archetypal patterns and instinctual drives that one might be tempted to reduce one to the other, claiming one or the other holds priority. There was the Freudian option, but Jung rejected it as biological reductionism. Freud would hold that archetypes (though he did not use this term) are nothing but imaginal representations of the two basic instincts, Eros and Thanatos. This option would posit archetypes as images of instinct and as derivative from them. Jung concedes that this argument is formidable: “I must admit that up to the present I have not laid hold of any argument that would finally refute this possibility.” Since Jung could not prove unequivocally that archetypes and instincts are not identical, biological reductionism remained a possibility. However, he also knew that

archetypes have, when they appear, a distinctly numinous character which can only be described as ‘spiritual’, if ‘magical’ is too strong a word. Consequently this phenomenon is of the utmost significance for the psychology of religion. In its effects it is anything but unambiguous. It can be healing or destructive, but never indifferent, provided of course that it has attained a certain degree of clarity. This aspect deserves the epithet ‘spiritual’ above all else. It not infrequently happens that the archetype appears in the form of a spirit in dreams or fantasy products, or even comports itself like a ghost. There is a mystical aura about its numinosity, and it has a corresponding effect upon the emotions. It mobilizes philosophical and religious convictions in the very people who deemed themselves miles above any such fit of weakness. Often it drives with unexampled passion and remorseless logic towards its goal and draws the subject under its spell, from which despite the most desperate resistance he is unable, and finally no longer even willing, to break free, because the experience brings with it a depth and fullness of meaning that was unthinkable before.

Archetypal images and the ideas derived from them have an extraordinary power to sway consciousness, every bit as forcefully as the identifiable instincts. This tended to persuade Jung that archetypes are not limited to instincts, that spirit is not reducible to body, nor mind to brain.

When the ego comes upon an archetypal image, it may become possessed by it, overwhelmed, and give up even wanting to resist, for the experience feels so rich and meaningful. Identification with archetypal images and energies constitutes Jung’s definition of inflation and even, eventually, psychosis. A charismatic leader, for example, convinces people with powerful words and stimulates ideas for action, and suddenly those ideas become the most important thing in life for the mesmerized followers and true believers. Life itself may be sacrificed for images such as the flag or the cross and for ideas like nationalism, patriotism, and loyalty to one’s religion or country. Crusades and countless other irrational or impractical endeavors have been engaged in because the participants felt, “This makes my life meaningful! This is the most important thing I’ve ever done.” Images and ideas powerfully motivate the ego and generate values and meanings. Cognitions frequently override and dominate instincts.

In contrast to the impact of the instincts on the psyche—when one feels driven by a physical need or necessity—the influence of archetypes leads to being caught up in big ideas and visions. Both affect the ego in a similar way dynamically, in that the ego is taken over, possessed, and driven.

“In spite or perhaps because of its affinity with instinct, the archetype represents the authentic element of spirit, but a spirit which is not to be identified with the human intellect, since it is the latter’s *spiritus rector.”* The distinction between spirit and intellect is easily confused, so Jung made an effort to state clearly that he is not speaking of the thinking function, but rather of the *spiritus rector* (guiding spirit), which guides the ego and its various functions. Gripped by an archetype, one’s thinking function may be used to rationalize the archetypal idea and to bring it toward realization. One might even become a theologian! When they are gripped by archetypal ideas, theologians will produce elaborate rationales to help integrate their archetypally based visions and ideas into a cultural context. But it is not the thinking function that grips them and motivates their efforts; rather it is the element of vision, archetypally rooted in nous, that directs the thinking function. Jung says baldly that the “essential content of all mythologies and all religions and all isms is archetypal.”

## The Relationship between Archetypes and Instincts

While it is true that instincts and archetypes belong together “as correspondences,” Jung clearly does not want to say that archetypes can be reduced to instincts or instincts to archetypes. They are intimately related as correspondences and they “ subsist side by side as reflections in our own minds of the opposition that underlies all psychic energy.” The psyche exists in the space between pure body and transcendent mind, between matter and spirit, and “psychic processes seem to be balances of energy flowing between spirit and instinct.” The psyche is an inbetween phenomenon, and its processes “behave like a scale along which consciousness ‘slides’. At one moment it finds itself in the vicinity of instinct, and falls under its influence; at another, it slides along to the other end where spirit predominates and even assimilates the instinctual processes most opposed to it.” There is a kind of eternal shuttle between *partie inferieur* and *partie superieur,* between the instinctual pole and the spiritual, archetypal pole of the psyche. Consciousness struggles “in a regular panic against being swallowed up in the primitivity and unconsciousness of sheer instinctuality” on the one hand, but it also resists complete possession by spiritual forces (i.e., psychosis) on the other. When coordinated, however, the archetype provides form and meaning to the instinct, and instinct provides raw physical energy to archetypal images to assist them in realizing the “spiritual goal toward which the whole nature of man strives; it is the sea to which all rivers wend their way, the prize which the hero wrests from the fight with the dragon.”

Jung maps the psyche as a spectrum, with the archetype at the ultraviolet end and the instinct at the infrared end. “Because the archetype is a formative principle of instinctual power, its blue is contaminated with red; it appears to be violet, or again, we could interpret the simile as an apocatastasis of instinct raised to a higher frequency, just as we could easily derive instinct from a latent (i.e., transcendent) archetype that manifests itself on a longer wavelength.” In practice and actual experience, instincts and archetypes are always found in mixed and never in pure form. The archetypal and the instinctual ends of the psychic spectrum come together in the unconsciousness, where they struggle with one another, intermingle, and unite to form units of energy and motivation which then appear in consciousness as urges, strivings, ideas, and images. What we experience in the psyche has been first psychized and then packaged in the unconscious.

Imagine a line running through the psyche and connecting instinct and spirit at either end of it. This line is attached to archetype on one end and to instinct at the other. It passes information and data through the psychoid realm into the collective and then into the personal unconscious. From there these contents make their way into consciousness. Instinctual perceptions and archetypal representations are the data of actual psychic experience, not the instincts and archetypes in themselves. Neither of the ends of the spectrum can be experienced directly, for neither is psychic. At the ends, the psyche fades into matter and spirit. And what are experienced as archetypal images “are very varied structures which all point back to one essentially ‘irrepresentable’ basic form.” All the archetypal information patterns come from a single source, an entity beyond human grasp for which Jung reserves the term *self* This basic form “is characterized by certain formal elements and by certain fundamental meanings, although these can be grasped only approximately.” It is Jung’s God term. (The self will be discussed in detail in chapter 7.) The archetypal images that link the self and ego-consciousness form a middle realm, which Jung calls *anima* and *animus,* the realm of soul (treated in chapter 6). In Jung’s view, polytheistic religions stem from and represent the realm of the anima and animus, while monotheistic religions base themselves on and point to the self archetype.

On Jung’s map, the psyche is a region that is located in the space between pure matter and pure spirit, between the human body and the transcendent mind, between instinct and archetype. He shows it as stretched between two ends of a spectrum that has openings at either end permitting an entrance of information into the psyche. At the ends of the psyche are the psychoid areas that produce quasi-psychic effects like psychosomatic symptoms and parapsychological happenings. As information passes through the psychoid area, it becomes psychized and transformed into psyche. In the psyche, matter and spirit meet. First these packages of information pass into the collective unconscious where they become somewhat contaminated by other contents already in the unconscious, and eventually they may enter consciousness in the form of intuitions, visions, dreams, perceptions of instinctual drives, images, emotions, and ideas. The ego must deal with emerging unconscious contents by making judgments about their value and sometimes decisions about whether or not to act on them. The burden of choice is placed on ego-consciousness to deal ethically with these invasions from inner space.