# The Revealed and the Concealed in Relations with Others: Persona and Shadow

It was an early observation of Jung’s—later developed into theoretical propositions—that the psyche consists of many parts and centers of consciousness. In this inner universe, there is not simply one planet, but an entire solar system and more. One can speak of people as having *a* personality, but in fact this is made up of a cluster of subpersonalities.

Jung elaborated these. There is the ego complex; then there are the multitude of lesser personal complexes, of which the mother complex and the father complex are the most important and most powerful; and finally one finds the many archetypal images and constellations. In a sense, we are made of many potentially divergent attitudes and orientations, and these can easily fall into opposition with one another and create conflicts that lead to neurotic personality styles. In this chapter, I will describe a pair of these divergent subpersonalities, the *shadow* and the *persona*. They are complementary structures and exist in every developed human psyche. Both of these are named after concrete objects in sensate experience. The shadow is the image of ourselves that slides along behind us as we walk toward the light. The persona, its opposite, is named after the Roman term for an actor’s mask. It is the face we wear to meet the social world around us.

At the beginning of life, the personality is a simple undifferentiated unity. It is unformed and more potential than real, and it is whole. As development takes place, this wholeness becomes differentiated, and it separates into parts. Ego-consciousness comes into being, and as it grows it leaves behind much of the whole self in what is now the “unconscious.” The unconscious, in turn, becomes structured as material clusters around imagoes, internalizations, and traumatic experiences to form the subpersonalities, the complexes. The complexes (as I discussed in chapter 2) are autonomous, and exhibit consciousness of their own. They also bind a certain amount of psychic energy and have a will of their own.

## The Ego’s Shadow

One of the unconscious psychic factors that the ego cannot control is the shadow. In fact, the ego is usually quite unaware that it even casts a shadow. Jung used the term shadow to denote a psychological reality that is relatively easy to grasp on an imagistic level but more difficult to grapple with on the practical and theoretical levels. He wants to highlight the flagrant unconsciousness that most people exhibit. Rather than referring to the shadow as a thing, however, it is better to think of psychological traits or qualities that are “in the shadow” (i.e., hidden, behind one’s back, in the dark) or “shadowy.” Whatever parts of the personality that would ordinarily belong to the ego if they were integrated, but have been suppressed because of cognitive or emotional dissonance, fall into the shadow. The specific contents of the shadow may change, depending upon the ego’s attitudes and its degree of defensiveness. Generally, the shadow has an immoral or at least a disreputable quality, containing features of a person’s nature that are contrary to the customs and moral conventions of society. The shadow is the unconscious side of the ego’s operations of intending, willing, and defending. It is the backside of the ego, so to speak.

Every ego has a shadow. This is unavoidable. In adapting to and coping with the world, the ego, quite unwittingly, employs the shadow to carry out unsavory operations that it could not perform without falling into a moral conflict. Without the ego’s knowledge, these protective and self-serving activities are carried out in the dark. The shadow operates much like a nation’s secret espionage system—without the explicit knowledge of the head of state, who is therefore allowed to deny culpability. Although introspection can to some extent bring these shadowy ego operations to consciousness, the ego’s own defenses against shadow awareness are usually so effective that little can penetrate them. Asking close friends or a longterm spouse to reveal their honest perceptions is usually more useful as a method of gathering information about the ego’s shadow operations than introspection.

If the ego’s willing, choosing, and intending are tracked deeply enough, one comes to realms of darkness and coldness where it becomes apparent that the ego has the capacity, in its shadow, to be extremely selfish, willful, unfeeling, and controlling. Here a person is purely egoistic and intent on fulfilling personal desires for power and pleasure at any cost. This heart of darkness within the ego is the very definition of human evil as it is played out in myth and story. The figure Iago in Shakespeare’s *Othello* is a classic example. In the shadow reside all the familiar cardinal sins. Jung identified Freud’s notion of the *id* with the shadow.

If shadow traits to some extent become conscious and integrated, a person is very different from the average individual. Most people do not know that they are quite as self-centered and egotistical as they are, and they want to appear unselfish and in control of their appetites and pleasures. People tend rather to hide such traits from others and themselves behind a facade that shows them to be considerate, thoughtful, empathic, reflective, and genial. The exceptions to this social norm are those who have formed a “negative identity”—the black sheep who are proud of their greed and aggressiveness and flaunt such traits in public, while in their hidden shadow side they are sensitive and sentimental. Other exceptions are those who have nothing to lose, the out-and-out criminals and sociopaths. Some notorious individuals, like Hitler or Stalin for instance, gain so much power that they can afford to indulge their evil passions to the fullest degree imaginable. Most people, however, think of themselves as decent and conduct themselves according to the rules of propriety in their social circles and only reveal shadowy elements by accident, in dreams, or when pushed to extremes. For them the shadow side of the ego still operates, but through the unconscious, manipulating the environment and the psyche so that certain intentions and needs get satisfied in a socially acceptable manner. What the ego wants in the shadow is not necessarily bad in and of itself, however, and often the shadow, once faced, is not as evil as imagined.

The shadow is not experienced directly by the ego. Being unconscious, it is projected onto others. When one is tremendously irritated by a really egotistical person, for instance, that reaction is usually a signal that an unconscious shadow element is being projected. Naturally the other person has to present a “hook” for the shadow projection, and so there is always a mixture between perception and projection in such strong emotional reactions. The psychologically naive or the defensively resistant person will focus on and argue for the perception and will ignore the projective part. This defensive strategy, of course, forecloses the possibility of using the experience to gain awareness of shadow features and for possible integration of them. Instead, the defensive ego insists on feeling self-righteous and casts itself in the role of innocent victim or simple observer. The other person is the evil monster, while the ego feels like an innocent lamb. Of such dynamics are scapegoats made.

## The Making of the Shadow

The specific contents and qualities that go into making up this internal structure, the shadow, are selected by the process of ego development. What ego-consciousness rejects becomes shadow; what it positively accepts and identifies with and absorbs into itself becomes a part of itself and of the persona. The shadow is characterized by the traits and qualities that are incompatible with the conscious ego and the persona. The shadow and the persona are both ego-alien “persons” that inhabit the psyche along with the conscious personality that we know ourselves to be. There is the official and “public person” that Jung called the *persona,* and this is more or less identified with ego-consciousness and forms the psycho-social identity of the individual. And yet it is also, like the shadow, ego-alien, although the ego is more at ease with it because it is compatible with social norms and mores. The shadow personality is hidden away from sight and comes out only on special occasions. The world is more or less unaware of this person. The persona is much more evident. It plays an official role, daily, of adaptation to the social world. Shadow and persona are like two brothers (for a man) or sisters (for a woman); one is out in public, and the other is hidden away and reclusive. They are a study in contrasts. If one is blond, the other is dark; if one is rational, the other is emotional. Narcissus and Goldmund, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, Cain and Abel, Eve and Lilith, Aphrodite and Hera—these figures are such pairs. The one complements—or more often opposes—the other. Persona and shadow are usually more or less exact opposites of one another, and yet they are as close as twins.

The persona is the person that we become as a result of acculturation, education, and adaptation to our physical and social environments. As I mentioned, Jung borrowed this term from the Roman stage where *persona* referred to the actor’s mask. By putting on a mask, the actor assumed a specific role and an identity within the drama, and his voice was projected out through the mouthpiece cut into the mask’s face. Taken psychologically, the persona is a functional complex whose job is both to conceal and to reveal an individual’s conscious thoughts and feelings to others. As a complex, the persona possesses considerable autonomy and is not under the full control of the ego. Once in role, the actor rattles off his or her lines willy-nilly and often without much consciousness. “How are you?” someone asks on a rainy morning, and quick as a wink, without a moment’s hesitation, you say, “Just fine, how about you?” The persona makes casual social interaction go more easily, and it smoothes the rough spots that might otherwise cause awkwardness or social distress.

The shadow, a complementary functional complex, is a sort of counter-persona. The shadow can be thought of as a subpersonality who wants what the persona will not allow. Mephistopheles in Goethe’s *Faust* is a classic example of a shadow figure. Faust is a bored intellectual who has seen it all, has read all the important books and has learned everything he wants to know, and now he has run out of gas and the will to live. He is depressed and contemplating suicide when a little poodle suddenly runs across his path and then changes into Mephistopheles. Mephistopheles entices Faust to leave his study and to go out into the world with him, to experience his other side, his sensuality. He introduces Faust to his inferior functions, sensation and feeling, and to the thrills and excitement of his hitherto unlived sexual life. This is a side of life that his persona as professor and intellectual had not permitted. Under the guidance of Mephistopheles, Faust goes through what Jung called enantiodromia, a reverse of the personality into its opposite character type. He embraces the shadow and indeed for a time becomes identified with its energies and qualities.

To an ego that has been identified with the persona and its assumed values and qualities, the shadow stinks of rottenness and evil. Mephistopheles does embody evil—pure, intentional, willful destructiveness. But the encounter with the shadow also has a transformative effect on Faust. He finds new energy, his boredom vanishes, and he sets out on adventures that will in the end give him a more complete experience of life. The problem of integrating the shadow is a moral and psychological problem of the most thorny sort. If a person completely shuns the shadow, life is proper but it is terribly incomplete. By opening up to shadow experience, however, a person becomes tainted with immorality but attains a greater degree of wholeness. This is truly a devil’s bargain. It is Faust’s dilemma, and it is a core problem of human existence. In Faust’s case, his soul is saved in the end, but only by the grace of God.

## The Persona

In his official writings Jung does not go into much detail about the shadow, but he does give an interesting and detailed account of the persona. From this we can draw as well some information about the shadow and its constellation within a personality. I will look now somewhat more closely at what Jung writes about the persona, its position in the psyche and its formation.

He defines this term in the major work *Psychological Types*, published in 1921. This volume concludes with a long chapter titled “Definitions,” in which Jung tries to be as clear as possible about the terminology he has adapted from psychoanalysis and taken from psychology in general as well as about the terms he has created for his own analytical psychology. As far as psychology and psychoanalysis are concerned, the term *persona* is Jung’s own special intellectual property. Section 48, one of the longest in this chapter, is devoted to the term *soul*, and this is where the persona is discussed. Here Jung reflects on two complementary structures, the persona and the anima. I will discuss the latter in the next chapter.

Today the term persona has been somewhat accepted into the vocabulary of psychology and contemporary culture. It is used frequently in popular parlance, in newspapers, and in literary theory. It means the person-as-presented, not the person-as-real. The persona is a psychological and social construct adopted for a specific purpose. Jung chose it for his psychological theory because it has to do with playing roles in society. He was interested in how people come to play particular roles, adopt a conventional collective attitude, and represent social and cultural stereotypes rather than assuming and living their own uniqueness. Certainly this is a well-known human trait. It is a kind of mimicry. Jung gave it a name and worked it into his theory of the psyche.

Jung begins his definition of the persona by making the point that many psychiatric and psychological studies have shown that the human personality is not simple but complex, that it can be shown to split and to fragment under certain conditions, and that there are many subpersonalities within the normal human psyche. However, “it is at once evident that such a plurality of personalities can never appear in a normal individual.” In other words, while we are not all “multiple personalities” in a clinical sense, everyone does manifest “traces of character splitting.” The normal individual is simply a less exaggerated version of what is found in pathology. “One has only to observe a man rather closely, under varying conditions, to see that a change from one milieu to another brings about a striking alteration of personality ... ‘angel abroad, devil at home’.” In public such an individual is all smiles, backslapping, gladhanding, extroverted, easygoing, happy-go-lucky, joking; at home, on the other hand, he is sour and grumpy, doesn’t talk to his kids, sulks and hides behind the newspaper, and can be verbally or otherwise abusive. Character is situational. The story of Jekyll and Hyde represents an extreme form of this. Another novel with the same theme is *The Picture of Dorian Gray,* where the main character keeps a picture of himself in the attic. As he grows older, the portrait ages, revealing his true nature and character; yet he continues to go out in public without wrinkles—youthful, sophisticated, and cheerful.

Jung goes on to discuss the fascinating subject of human sensitivity to milieus, to social environments. People are usually sensitive to other people’s expectations. Jung points out that particular milieus such as families, schools, and workplaces require one to assume specific attitudes. By “attitude” Jung means “an a priori orientation to a definite thing, no matter whether this be represented in consciousness or not.” An attitude can be latent and unconscious, but it is constantly operating to orient a person to a situation or a milieu. Further, an attitude is “a combination of psychic factors or contents which will ... determine action in this or that definite direction.” An attitude is a feature of character, therefore. The longer an attitude persists and the more frequently it is called upon to meet the demands of a milieu, the more habitual it becomes. As behaviorism would express it, the more frequently a behavior or attitude is reinforced by the environment, the stronger and the more entrenched it becomes. People can be trained to develop specific attitudes to certain milieus and thus to respond in particular ways, reacting to signals or cues as they have been trained to do. Once an attitude has been fully developed, all that is required to activate behavior is the appropriate cue or trigger. Jung observed this in 1920, about the time that behaviorism was gaining ground in North America, led by John Broadus Watson, whose first major publication appeared in 1913.

In contrast to people living and working in rural or natural areas, which are relatively unified environments, many educated urban dwellers move in two totally different milieus: the domestic circle and the public world. This was more true of men than of women in the Europe of Jung’s day. Men of Jung’s time and culture worked in one environment and lived domestically in another, and they had to respond to two distinctly different milieus, each of which provided a different set of cues. “These two totally different environments demand two totally different attitudes, which, depending on the degree of the ego’s identification with the attitude of the moment, produce a duplication of character.”

A friend of mine has a midlevel managerial job in a government agency, and so he must set the tone for employees in his group regarding values and behavioral patterns in the public sector. The agency is a milieu, and he finds out from other sources what the correct values are and then informs the workers under him that, for example, they must be sensitive to such issues as nondiscrimination, sexism, and affirmative action. My friend told me that he plays that role easily and well in the workplace, but when he watches TV in the privacy of his own home he has very different reactions. There he is ultraconservative. In the workplace he is a liberal and enlightened modern man. His ego is not, however, strongly identified with the attitude of that milieu. He has a functional persona: one that he puts on and takes off easily without identifying with it. My friend is very clear in his own mind that he does not identify with that workplace persona.

Frequently, however, the ego does identify with the persona. The psychological term *identification* points to the ego’s ability to absorb and unite with external objects, attitudes, and persons.

This is a more or less unconscious process. One simply finds oneself unintentionally imitating another person. Perhaps one does not even notice it oneself, but other people see the mimicry. In principle, one can say that the ego is quite separate from the persona, but in actual life this is often not the case, because the ego tends to identify with the roles it plays in life. “The domestic character is, as a rule, molded by emotional demands and an easygoing acquiescence for the sake of comfort and convenience; whence it frequently happens that men who in public life are extremely energetic, spirited, obstinate, willful and ruthless appear good-natured, mild, compliant, even weak, when at home and in the bosom of the family. Which is the true character, the real personality? This question is often impossible to answer.”

Even so, there is always more to the ego than persona identification. The persona will at most form a close wrapping around the side of the ego that faces out into the social world. But people will usually still recognize a difference between role and true inner identity. The ego’s core is archetypal as well as individual and personal. This is the still, small point of reflection, the center of the “I.” The archetypal side of the ego’s core is pure “I am,” a manifestation of the self. It is simply “I-am-ness” (see chapter 1).

On the personal side, however, the ego is permeable to influence from external forces. Such influence makes its way into the ego and pushes aside this pure “I-ness” as the ego identifies with the new content. This is the ego “learning.” We learn our names. After that we become our names, we identify with the sounds of them. When the ego is identified with the persona, it feels identical to it. Then I *am* my name; I *am* the son of my father and mother, the brother of my sister. Once this identification is made, I am no longer simply “I am that I am,” but instead, I am Murray Stein, born on such-and-such a date, with this particular personal history. This is who I am now. I identify with memories, with a construction of my history, with some of my qualities. In this way the pure “I-ness”—the archetypal piece—can get obscured and go into hiding or disappear from the conscious altogether. Then one is truly dependent upon the persona for one’s entire identity and sense of reality, not to mention one’s sense of self-worth and belonging.

Of course this can also fluctuate. At times one can be in the pure “I-am” state, not identifying with anything in particular; at other times one is firmly identified with some content or quality and heavily invested in a persona image. T.S. Eliot said of cats that they have three names: one that everybody knows, one that only a few know, and one that only the cat knows! The first and second refer to the persona, the third refers to the archetypal core of the ego.

## The Two Sources of the Persona

Jung found two sources of the persona: “In accordance with social conditions and requirements, the social character is oriented on the one hand by the expectations and demands of society, and on the other by the social aims and aspirations of the individual.” The first, the expectations and demands of the milieu, includes such requirements as being a certain kind of person, behaving appropriately according to the social mores of the group, and often believing in certain propositions about the nature of reality (such as consenting to religious teachings). The second source includes the individual’s social ambitions.

In order for society to be able to influence one’s attitudes and behavior, one must want to belong to society. The ego must be motivated to accept the persona features and the roles that society requires and offers, or else they will simply be avoided. There will be no identification at all. An agreement must be struck between the individual and society in order for persona formation to take hold. Otherwise the individual lives an isolated life on the margins of culture, forever a sort of uneasy adolescent in an adult world. This is different from the heroic rebel who goes his own way and ignores social norms. That is another kind of persona, and one that is offered by all societies and groups. There are many roles to play.

Generally speaking, the more prestigious the role, the stronger is the tendency to identify with it. People do not usually identify with lower-class persona roles like garbage collector or janitor, or even middleclass roles like manager or superintendent. If they do, they often do so humorously. These jobs have their own value and dignity but they do not imply roles to wear proudly in society, and the temptation to identify strongly with them is minimal. Role identification is generally motivated by ambition and social aspiration. For example, a person who is elected to the United States Senate acquires a role with high collective value and enormous prestige. With it come fame, honor, and high social visibility, and the person who is a senator tends to fuse with this role, even to the extent of wishing to be treated by close friends with conspicuous respect. It has been reported that after John F. Kennedy’s election as president of the United States even his close family members called him Mr. President.

In Ingmar Bergman’s autobiographical film *Fanny and Alexander*, a little boy is sent to live with a horrible, abusive bishop who is emotionally remote and cold and deeply identified with a religious persona. In one scene of the film, the bishop is shown dreaming. In the dream, he is struggling to tear off a mask, which he cannot detach, and he ends up pulling his face off along with the mask. The bishop’s ego is utterly fused with the bishop persona because that role has guaranteed his personal aspirations in life. A bishop is without doubt a highranking person in society. Similarly physicians, military men, and royalty are granted personas that attract strong identification. And yet the bishop, in his nightmare, tries to remove the mask from his face. Why?

The relation between ego and persona is not simple because of the contradictory aims of these two functional complexes. The ego moves in a fundamental way toward separation and individuation, toward consolidating a position first of all outside of the unconscious, and then also somewhat outside of the family milieu. There is in the ego a strong movement toward autonomy, toward an “I-ness” that can function independently. At the same time, another part of the ego, which is where the persona takes root, is moving in the opposite direction, toward relating and adapting to the object world. These are two contrary tendencies within the ego—a need for separation and independence on the one hand, and a need for relationship and belonging on the other. The ego’s radical desire for separation/individuation is often rooted in the shadow because it is so threatening both to group life and to the individual’s well-being. Objectively, we all need other people in order to survive physically and psychologically. The ego’s movement toward relationship and adaptation to the present milieu, which seeks to insure survival, provides the opportunity for the persona to take hold. And this then becomes a person’s self-presentation to the world.

## Persona Development

This conflict in the ego between individuation/separation and social conformity generates a good deal of the ego’s basic anxiety. How can one be free, unique, and individual while also being accepted and liked by others and accommodating to their needs and wishes. Clearly a source of fundamental conflict exists between ego and persona development. By early adulthood, one hopes that sufficient development has taken place in both ego and persona so that the ego’s dual needs for independence and relationship are satisfied, while at the same time the persona has made a suitable enough adaptation so that the ego can live in the real world. Famous geniuses like Wagner, Beethoven, and Picasso seem to be exceptions to this rule in that their gifts grant them license to be themselves as individuals to an extraordinary degree. They are forgiven their excesses because of what they offer the world in compensation.

The ego does not deliberately choose to identify with a particular persona. People find themselves in milieus in which they have to survive, and most do their best to make their way ahead. Birth order is an important factor, also gender. A little girl or boy observes what other kids are doing and imitates them. Little girls try out their mothers’ attitudes while trying on their mothers’ clothes. Little boys also try on their mothers’ clothes sometimes, and their parents worry about it. Clothes represent the persona. Little boys more frequently imitate their fathers or brothers, wearing caps when they do, and swagger and spit if that’s what the others are doing. Gender is certainly one way in which we sort ourselves out early on, and these features are taken up in the persona. A youngster realizes that he or she is treated in a certain way if the behavior is right, and responds in a gender-appropriate manner. This may come quite naturally to the individual child or not. Sometimes the persona fits, sometimes it does not. Eventually an attitude is formed that is at least adequate, if not enhancing, in terms of gender-related attractiveness. (The deeper issues related to gender and gender identification will be discussed in the following chapter.)

Persona development has two potential pitfalls. One is over-identification with the persona. The individual becomes unduly concerned with pleasing and adapting to the social world and comes to believe that this constructed image is all there is to the personality. The other problem lies in not paying enough attention to the external object world and being too exclusively involved with the inner world (a condition that Jung will describe as anima or animus possession). Such a person attends to impulses, wishes, desires, and fantasies, and is so taken up with that world and identified with it that not enough attention is paid to other people. Consequently, such a person tends to be inconsiderate, blind, and unrelated to others, and gives up these characteristics only when forced to do so by the harshest blows of fate.

Persona development is typically a major problem in adolescence and early adulthood, when there is so much activity in the inner world, so many impulses, fantasies, dreams, desires, ideologies and idealisms on the one side and so much peer pressure toward conformity on the other. Relatedness to the larger social world may look very primitive and collective, unbalanced by a kind of horde mentality, an identification with the peer group and its collective values. Such identification with the peer group assists the adolescent in breaking free from parents, a necessary step toward maturity. At the same time, the teenager is blindly inconsiderate, indeed, almost unaware, of the object world and lives in a fantasy of invincibility. Adults tend to apply terms like inflation and grandiosity to describe this combination of hypertrophy of the inner world and maladaptation to outer reality. On the other hand, some adolescents pay too much attention to adult values and expectations. Dressed in their button-down shirts, carrying briefcases, and, at fifteen, talking about becoming corporate attorneys, they are so adapted to expectations of family and culture that not much personal identity is developing. They are on the way to becoming mere stereotypes of cultural forms, victims of premature persona adaptation.

Both introverts and extroverts develop a persona, for both attitude types must relate to the world of objects. For extroverts, however, the development of the persona is a simpler process than it is for introverts. Extroverted libido goes to the object and stays there, and extroverts record and relate to objects without much fuss or complication. For introverts, attention and psychic energy go out to objects but then return to the subject, and this creates a more complicated relation to objects. An object is not only something outside the psyche but is also, for the introvert, profoundly inside the psyche. Attachment is more difficult. Extroverts, therefore, have an easier time finding a suitable persona. They are more at ease with the object world because it doesn’t threaten them so intimately. The introvert’s persona is more ambiguous, diffident or uncertain, and varies from one context to another.

For everyone, though, the persona must relate to objects and protect the subject. This is its dual function. While introverts can be very outgoing with a few people, in a large group they shrink and disappear and the persona often feels inadequate, particularly with strangers and in situations in which the introvert does not occupy a defined role. Cocktail parties are a torture, but acting a role on stage may be a pure joy and pleasure. Many famous actors and actresses are quite deeply introverted. In private they may be shy, but given a public role they feel protected and secure and can easily pass as the most extroverted types imaginable.

The persona, when used creatively within the context of a strong psychological development, functions to express as well as to hide aspects of the personality. An adequate persona is broad enough not only to express the socially appropriate aspects of the personality but also to be genuine and plausible. The individual can, without much damage, identify with a persona to the extent that it is an true expression of personality. Of course this may change with age, and new personas appear as individuals enter new stages of life. Social extroverts may become more introverted, for example, as they pass into their 50’s and 60’s. Later in life one also realizes there is a difference between feeling that the persona is true, honest, and genuine on the one hand and fully and unconsciously identifying with it on the other.

Essentially, the persona, which is the psychic skin between ego and world, is not only a product of interaction with objects, but includes as well the individual’s projections onto those objects. We adapt to what we perceive other people are and what they want. This may be considerably different from how others see them or how they see themselves. Wrapped into the fabric of the persona are projections that originate in the complexes, for instance in the parental complexes, and return to the subject via the introjective process and enter into the persona. This is why early childhood has such a profound effect upon adult personas. Even after parents are long since outgrown and left behind, they continue to affect the persona because they are projected into the world from the parental complexes and are continually adapted to by the individual’s persona. We are good little boys and girls long after we need to be. Carrying the persona over from one context to another presents problems because, in a continuing effort to adapt, the original context is projected onto new, quite different situations. This was Freud’s observation concerning “transference.” The old context of childhood is transferred into the new context of the doctor-patient relationship. Until one realizes how milieus are different, one perseveres in old habitual behaviors, responding to the new milieu as though it were the old familiar one.

## The Persona’s Transformations

The archetypal core of the ego does not change over time, but the persona can be and is modified many times in the course of a lifetime, depending on the ego’s perception of the changed environment and its ability to interact with it. A major change occurs in the passage from childhood into adolescence; another in the passage from adolescence into adulthood; another in the course of the mid-life transition from early adulthood into middle age; yet another in the transition into old age. The competent ego meets each of these adaptational challenges with appropriate alterations in self-concept and persona self-presentation. People think differently of themselves, dress differently, cut their hair differently, buy different kinds of cars and houses depending on their age, marital status, economic and social class, and peer-group preferences. All of this is reflected in persona changes.

The various roles one assumes in the course of a lifetime have, of course, a collective and to some extent archetypal basis. The persona has, like every functional complex, an archetypal core. There are predictable, typical roles to be filled in all human groups. For example, there is the oldest child who is the Little Adult, and the mischievous Trickster Kid who is still playing practical jokes in middle and old age, and the alluring Femme Fatale who flirts and seduces her way through life beginning in earliest childhood. Families assign roles in typical ways to their children and their adult members. Birth order of children often plays a large role in the personas they will adopt. The first child is a responsible little grownup, the middle child is a mediator, and the youngest child is the creative baby. The black sheep role is found everywhere and in all times, as is the scapegoat. People are assigned such roles by unconscious dynamics within families and groups, and when they accept them in childhood they often carry some version of the role with them throughout life.

What is it that causes personas to stick to people with tenacity? In part it is identification and sheer familiarity. A persona becomes identified with one’s personality. It offers a psychosocial identity. But shame is also a fundamental motivator. The persona protects one from shame, and the avoidance of shame is probably the strongest motive for developing and holding on to a persona. Ruth Benedict’s writings on shame and guilt cultures showed that western nations are characteristically guilt cultures and eastern countries are by contrast shame cultures. Shame cultures emphasize persona more than do guilt cultures, in the sense that if one loses face one might as well die. Loss of face is the ultimate crisis. The situation is quite different in guilt cultures where guilt can be assuaged or redressed: the guilty person can pay the price and be restored to community.

Guilt involves a discrete action, whereas shame wipes out one’s whole sense of self-worth. Shame is a more primitive, and potentially a more destructive kind of emotion. We tend to feel either guilty about or profoundly ashamed of the things we do that are at odds with the adopted persona. This is the realization of shadow in the personality. Shadow induces shame, a sense of unworthiness, a feeling of uncleanness, of being soiled and unwanted. To be well-trained is to be proud; to soil oneself is shameful. Nature has been conquered by the toilet-trained ego. Such experiences of shame include anything that does not fit into the way we were trained: to be a good person, the right kind of person; to fit in, to be accepted. In a puritanical culture like ours, particular kinds of sexual fantasies and behaviors that are not appropriate to a “good person’s” persona easily lead to feelings of shame. Another shadow feature is aggression. Feeling aggressive, hateful, or envious are shaming emotions.

These normal human reactions tend to be hidden away; we are embarrassed by them, in the same way that we are ashamed of certain physical or character flaws that we see in ourselves. The persona is the face we put on to meet the other faces, to be like them and to be liked by them. We do not want to be too different, for our points of difference, where the persona ends and the shadow begins, make us ashamed.

## Integrating Persona and Shadow

The shadow and persona are a classic pair of opposites, standing in the psyche as polarities of the ego. Since the overall task of psychological development (“individuation,” discussed in chapter 8) is integration, and wholeness is the over-arching and supreme value, we need to ask here in a preliminary way at least: What does it mean to integrate persona and shadow? In the context of this chapter’s topic, integration hinges on self-acceptance, on fully accepting those parts of oneself that do not belong in the persona image, which is itself usually an image of an ideal or at least of a cultural norm. The personal aspects of which one is ashamed are often felt to be radically evil. While some things truly are evil and destructive, frequently shadow material is not evil. It is only felt to be so because of the shame attached to it due to its nonconformity with the persona.

What is it like when somebody has achieved a measure of integration between persona and shadow? Jung quotes a letter from a former patient, written some time after he saw her for analysis:

Out of evil, much good has come to me. By keeping quiet, repressing nothing, remaining attentive, and by accepting reality—taking things as they are, and not as I wanted them to be—by doing all this, unusual knowledge has come to me, and unusual powers as well, such as I could never have imagined before. I always thought that when we accepted things they overpowered us in some way or other. This turns out not to be true at all, and it is only by accepting them that one can assume an attitude towards them. So now I intend to play the game of life, being receptive to whatever comes to me, good and bad, sun and shadow forever alternating, and in this way also accepting my own nature with its positive and negative sides. Thus everything becomes more alive to me. What a fool I was! How I tried to force everything to go according to the way I felt it ought to!

This woman has stepped back both from the persona and from splitting persona and shadow into opposites, and she is now simply observing, reflecting on and accepting her psyche as it comes to her, then sorting, seeing what it was about, and making some choices. She has created a psychological distance between the ego complex and the persona, as well as between the ego and the shadow. She is no longer possessed on either end of the spectrum.

Jung holds that opposites are united in the psyche through the intervention of a “third thing.” A conflict between opposites—persona and shadow, for example—can be regarded as an individuation crisis, an opportunity to grow through integration. Coming into conflict are collective values on the persona side, and shadow aspects of the ego that belong to the individual’s native instinctual makeup (Freud’s *id*) and also some that are derivative from the archetypes and the unconscious complexes. Since shadow content is not acceptable to the persona, the conflict may be fierce. Jung held that if the two poles are held in tension, a solution will appear if the ego can let go of both and create an inner vacuum in which the unconscious can offer a creative solution in the form of a new symbol. This symbol will present an option for movement ahead that will include something of both—not simply a compromise, but an amalgamation that calls forth a new attitude on the part of the ego and a new kind of relation to the world. This process can be observed as people develop both in therapy and through life experience—as they outgrow their former conflicts, assume new personas, and integrate formerly unacceptable parts of the self.

People do change through therapy and in the course of life development. The persona, as a tool of adaptation, has a great potential for change. It can become increasingly flexible, given that the ego is willing to modify old patterns. Stories such as *Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde* describe a complete split between persona and shadow. In these stories there is no integration, only fluctuation back and forth between the opposites. Shadow roles and impulses are acted out, without the appearance of a transcendent function to bring about an integration of those opposites. One wonders about people in real life who cannot integrate such opposites. In some cases, the dark side may be so extreme and so highly charged with energy that its integration with a socially acceptable persona of any kind is impossible. Today the only solution to this problem is psychotropic medicine, which can put a severe damper on the unconscious and inhibit the shadow’s power sources. In other cases, the ego is too unstable and weak to moderate impulsivity enough to allow for the constellation of the transcendent function.
