# The Way to the Deep Interior: Anima and Animus

In his autobiography Jung tells a story about the discovery of the anima. He writes that during his years of intense inner work after breaking with Freud in 1913 there was a period when he questioned himself about the nature and value of what he was doing. Is this science? he asked himself. Or is it art? He was recording his dreams, interpreting them, sometimes painting them, and trying to understand the meaning of his spontaneous fantasies. At a certain moment he heard a female “voice” say, “It is art.” Surprised, he entered into a dialogue with her and gradually recognized that she resembled a patient of his. She was thus a sort of internalized figure, but she also spoke for some of his own unconscious thoughts and values. In his own ego and persona Jung was self-identified as a scientist, not an artist. But this voice spoke for another point of view. While retaining his conscious ego position, he began a dialogue with this figure and a study of her. There was more to her than simply the internalized image of his patient. Gradually, through dialogue, she took shape and assumed a fuller personality. “I felt a little awed by her. It was like the feeling of an invisible presence in the room,” he relates.

For Jung this was an important inner experience of the *anima,* and it has become a key reference point for the anima’s manifestation in the collective memory of analytical psychology. Since Jung many other people who have engaged in active imagination have discovered similar inner figures. Conventionally, for men the anima is a feminine figure; for women the equivalent inner figure—called the *animus*—is masculine. The anima and animus are subjective personalities that represent a deeper level of the unconscious than the shadow. For better or worse, they reveal the features of the soul and lead into the realm of the collective unconscious.

Throughout this chapter I will refer to this inner structure as the anima/us. It is, like the shadow, a personality within the psyche that does not match the self-presentation and self-identity reflected by the persona. It is different from the shadow, however, in that it does not belong to the ego in the same way: it is more “other” than the shadow is. If the distinction between persona and shadow is “good versus bad”—plus and minus, positive and negative aspects of the ego—the distinction between ego and anima/us is marked by the masculine-feminine polarity. It is not the difference between Cain and Abel but between Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.

## Defining Anima and Animus

Of all the aspects of Jung’s theory, the topic of this chapter has become in many ways the most controversial, for it raises profound gender issues and suggests essential differences in the psychology of men and women. Whereas this subject may have seemed calm and settled in Jung’s time, today it stirs a hornet’s nest. To some contemporaries it seems that Jung was a man before his time who anticipated and indeed advocated a type of protofeminism. To others he appears to be a spokesman for stereotypic traditional views on the differences between men and women. In fact, I think he was a little of both.

In his later works Jung refers to the anima and animus as archetypal figures of the psyche. Thus they lie essentially beyond the influence of the forces that mold and shape the consciousness of individuals such as family, society, culture, and tradition. Archetypes are not derived from culture; rather cultural forms (in Jung’s theory) are derived from archetypes. This definition of the anima/us as archetype therefore places its deepest essence outside of the psyche altogether, in the realm of impersonal spiritual forms and powers. Anima and animus are basic life forms, and they shape human individuals and societies, in addition to other influences that impact them. The archetype is, as we saw in chapter 4, a *Ding an sich* (Kant: “a thing in itself”), and therefore it lies beyond the range of human perception. We can only perceive it indirectly by noting its manifestations.

The anima/us, strictly speaking, is a scientific hypothesis about “something” that exists but cannot be observed directly, like an unknown star whose position and size are known only from measurements of gravitational pulls in its vicinity. And yet, since the manifestations of anima and animus, as Jung noted and described them, do in fact often resemble well-known cultural images embodied by traditional men and women, the question has been raised: Was Jung a victim of his cultural blinders who inadvertently became the exponent of cultural stereotypes? In other words, are the “archetypes” in fact social constructions? Or, was Jung investigating deeper structures that perhaps are embedded in these cultural patterns but transcend them and are indeed universal forms of human psychological traits and behavior? I will not answer this question definitively in this chapter, but I hope to advance the case that the issue is more complicated and Jung’s thinking more complex than many of his critics have granted. In the meantime, I will try to present his thought as clearly as possible.

We will enter this territory carefully, trying to grasp Jung’s meanings for these elusive terms step by step. If the places on the map of psyche which we have examined up to this point seem relatively clear and well-defined, the territory of anima and animus seems at times like a deep and tangled wilderness. Perhaps this is as it should be, for here we are entering the deeper layers of the unconscious, the collective unconscious, the territory of the archetypal images, where boundaries are blurred.

Before approaching the issue of gender in relation to these terms, I should point out that an account can be given of anima and animus that does not draw gender into it at all. Gender can be seen as a secondary feature of the anima/us, just as an object’s essence is not determined by blue or pink. There is an abstract, structural way of understanding the anima/us. Because it is possible to speak of this feature of the psyche as abstract structure, I will use, throughout this chapter, the notation “anima/us.” This indicates a psychic structure that is common to men and women. The differentiated endings of -a and -us will be used when I mean to refer to the gendered features of this inner object. Abstractly, the anima/us is a psychic structure that (a) is complementary to the persona and (b) links the ego to the deepest layer of the psyche, namely to the image and experience of the self.

As discussed in the previous chapter, the persona is the habitual attitude that an ego adopts to meet the world. It is a public personality and facilitates adaptation to the demands of physical and (primarily) social reality. It is a “functional complex,” to use Jung’s term from his definition in the 1921 text *Psychological Types.* It operates like the skin on the body, providing a protective barrier between the ego and the outside. The anima/us is similarly a functional complex, but one that is concerned with adaptation to the inner world. “The natural function of the animus (as well as of in the anima) is to remain in place between individual consciousness and the collective unconscious; exactly as the persona is a sort of stratum between the ego-consciousness and the objects of the external world. The animus and the anima should function as a bridge, or a door, leading to the images of the collective unconscious, as the persona should be a sort of bridge into the world.” In other words, the anima/us allows the ego to enter into and to experience the depths of the psyche.

In 1921, now freed from his dependence on Freud and ready to launch his own views on depth psychology, Jung published *Psychological Types,* in which he summarized his own new theory to date. In this volume many new terms appeared and were used to define his revisionist views on the nature and structure of the psyche. So much was this the case, that he felt (as I indicated in chapter 5) a need to include a whole chapter of definitions at the conclusion of this work. These are detailed definitions and can be read as a kind of early textbook in analytical psychology. Here he gives extensive coverage to the concepts of anima and animus in the entries on “soul” and “soul-image.” These definitions, while somewhat mechanical and simplistic, do help to provide boundaries and to give shape to his terms, at least in the way he was using them at that time.

In approaching the definition of the anima/us, he contrasts it with the persona: “The persona is exclusively concerned with the relation to objects,” while the anima/us concerns the ego’s relation to the subject. “By the ‘subject’ I mean first of all those vague, dim stirrings, feelings, thoughts, and sensations which flow in on us not from any demonstrable continuity of conscious experience of the object, but well up like a disturbing, inhibiting, or at times helpful influence from the dark inner depths.” The “subject” here is primarily the world of the unconscious, not the ego. This is the subjective side of the psyche, its ground, its inner space. It contains “inner objects,” so to speak, sometimes called by Jung “imagoes” or simply “images” or “contents.” Because the term “subject,” at least in this specific context, refers to the unconscious, it follows quite logically that “just as there is a relation to the outer object, an outer attitude [i.e., the persona], there is a relation to the inner object, an inner attitude.”

Jung concedes that it “is readily understandable that this inner attitude, by reason of its extremely intimate and inaccessible nature, is far more difficult to discern than the outer attitude, which is immediately perceived by everyone.” One can easily enough observe a person’s treatment of others, but it requires more subtlety to see how people treat themselves. What is their attitude toward the inner world? Is it receptive and warm (as the persona may be), or is it harsh and hypercritical? Many generous people are their own worst enemies within—their own meanest judges and harshest critics—but this is concealed behind a charming and hospitable persona. Or a person may be extremely judgmental of others while treating his own inner life with sentimental self-indulgence. One must know people well before learning how they actually treat themselves inwardly. Do they take themselves seriously? Do they treat themselves like children? The ways they actually feel about their own deeper inner selves characterize their anima or animus attitude.

Jung says further in this passage: “one man will not allow himself to be disturbed in the slightest by his inner processes ... another man is just as completely at their mercy ... a vaguely unpleasant sensation puts the idea into his head that he is suffering from a secret disease, a dream fills him with gloomy forebodings ... One man takes them as physiological, another attributes them to the behaviour of his neighbours, another finds in them a religious revelation.” “Thus, Jung concludes, the inner attitude ... is correlated with just as definite a functional complex as the outer attitude. People who, it would seem, entirely overlook their inner psychic processes no more lack a typical inner attitude than the people who constantly overlook the outer object and the reality of facts lack a typical outer one.”

The above summarizes Jung’s structural definition of the anima/us as he presented it in 1921 in *Psychological Types.* The anima/us is an attitude that governs one’s relationship to the inner world of the unconscious—imagination, subjective impressions, ideas, moods and emotions. So far this says nothing whatever about content of this structure nor about gender. The usual shorthand definition is that the anima is the inner feminine for a man and the animus is the inner masculine for a woman. But one can also simply speak of them as functional structures that serve a specific purpose in relation to the ego. As psychic structure, the anima/us is the instrument by which men and women enter into and adjust to the deeper parts of their psychological natures. As the persona faces out into the social world and assists with necessary external adaptations, so the anima/us faces inward to the inner world of the psyche and helps a person to adapt to the demands and requirements of intuitive thoughts, feelings, images, and emotions that confront the ego.

For instance, a man who is frequently moody is said to have an “anima problem.” “He is in the anima today,” one might say to a friend. His anima, instead of helping to manage emotions, releases a mood that seeps like a gas into ego consciousness and carries with it, in suspension so to speak, a lot of raw and undifferentiated affect. This has been known to interfere with ego functioning, to say the least. This man’s ego becomes identified with the anima personality, which is as a rule hypersensitive and soggy with emotionality. His anima is not highly developed, and instead of helping him to cope with an overwhelming mood it draws him deeper into it. A man given to frequent and intense moodiness has too close a relation with this—usually inferior—part of his personality. Of course if he is a poet like Rilke, who had an anima problem of the first order, he can use this relation creatively. But he may be only uncommonly emotional and overreactive to slights and minor annoyances and injuries and therefore psychologically dysfunctional. His relationships typically are fraught with conflict because he has emotional reactions that are too powerful for him to manage. The anima overwhelms him rather than helps him.

Similarly, a woman with an “animus problem” is also overcome by her unconscious, typically by emotionally charged thoughts and opinions which control her more than she controls them. This is not very different from the anima-possessed man, only the accent tends to be more intellectual on the woman’s side. These autonomous ideas and opinions end up disturbing her adaptation to the world because they are delivered with the emotional energy of a bully. Often they wreak havoc on her relationships, because the people near her must build self-protective shields around themselves when they are with her. They feel on the defensive and uncomfortable in her presence. Hard as she may want to be receptive and intimate, she cannot because her ego is subject to these invasions of disruptive energies that transform her into anything but the kinder, gentler person she would like to be. Instead, she is abrasive and gripped by unconscious strivings for power and control. This is what Jung called animus possession. The animus is a powerful personality that is not congruent with the ego or the desired persona. It is “other.”

Men in the grip of the anima tend to withdraw into hurt feelings; women in the grip of the animus tend to attack. This is a conventional distinction between the genders, and of course it is subject to revision in the light of recent cultural developments. In both cases, however, whatever the content of the “possession” happens to be, the inner world of the unconscious is not sufficiently held in check, and emotional and irrational neediness disturbs and distorts normal relations with other people and with life in general. Anima/us possession throws the gates of the unconscious wide open and lets in practically everything that has enough energy to come through. Moods and whims sweep in and carry one away. Impulse control is minimal. There is no containment of thought or affect. This is an ego problem, too, of course—symptomatic of an undeveloped ego that cannot hold and contain the contents that normally float into consciousness but need to be reflected upon and digested before being carried into verbal or physical action. But there is also the problem of too little development in the anima/us structure. This lack of development is like an undeveloped muscle. It is too flabby and inadequate to do its job when called upon. Men will then typically look for a woman to help them manage their emotions, and women will typically find a man who can receive their inspired thoughts and do something with them. Thus other people enter the game of ego-anima /us relations.

For the sake of discussion, let me describe an *ideal* psychological development (highly theoretical and improbable as this may be). The conscious and unconscious parts of the psychic system work together in a balanced and harmonious interplay, and this takes place in part between the anima/us and the persona. Here the ego is not flooded by material from without or within but is rather facilitated and protected by these structures. And life energy—libido—flows in a progressive movement into adaptation to the tasks and demands of life. This is a picture of healthy, highly functioning personality with access to inner resources and skilled at outer adjustment. The attitude toward the outer world is balanced, and it is complemented by an attitude toward the world within. Neither is out of joint or inadequately developed. The persona is able to adapt to the demands of life and to manage stable relations with the surrounding social and natural worlds. Internally there is well managed and steady access to a wellspring of energy and creative inspiration. Outer and inner adaptations are adequate to the demands of life.

Why isn’t life more like this? Actually, many people experience something like this from time to time in their lives. These are the good periods of work and love. But these are often relatively shortlived interludes in a much more conflict-ridden picture. One large reason for this is that we develop unevenly. And very little attention is paid in our contemporary culture to true inner development—to what Jung called “individual culture” as opposed to collective (persona-based) culture. Inside, most of us are extremely primitive. It is only when the persona is stripped away and the anima/us opens the gates to the deeper layers of the unconscious—when, as at midlife, for example, the ego is torn by conflict between persona and anima/us—that the need for inner development becomes an acute issue and is taken seriously. While this may look like an outbreak of neurosis, it may well be the call for further individuation, and the challenge to take a deeper journey into the interior on the road toward individual development.

## Gender and Anima and Animus

Turning now to the views on anima and animus that imply gender directly, it is first of all noteworthy that these are terms taken from the Latin. Like most cultivated Europeans of his day, Jung was fluent in the classical languages and he found it quite natural and convenient to use these sources to name psychic figures and structures. Anima means “soul” in Latin, and animus means “spirit.” (In German these appear as *Seele* and *Geist.*) From one point of view, there is not actually much difference in meaning between these two Latin terms. If one thinks of the *soul (anima)* as leaving the body at death, as the Greeks and Romans supposed, it is equivalent to saying that the *spirit (animus)* has departed. Spirit is often depicted as breath or air, and to catch a person’s last breath as it leaves the body is to catch the person’s soul. Thus the terms spirit and soul are nearly interchangeable. Also, both words refer to the inner world of persons, to the soulful and the spiritual. The questions to ask about one’s own anima and animus are: What kind of soul do I have? What kind of spirit?

Of course Jung is not speaking of the religious meaning of soul when he uses the term anima. He does not mean the immortal part of a human being, as traditional religious writers use this term. He is capturing the term for psychology, and by it he means to denote the hidden inner side of a man’s personality. Similarly, with the term animus he is not referring to something metaphysical and transcendent—the Holy Spirit, for instance—but rather to the hidden inner side of a woman’s personality.

The endings of the words connote a gender difference. The ending of anim-a is feminine and the ending of anim-us is masculine. *(Seele* and Geist are similarly feminine and masculine respectively in the German language.) So by assigning these terms, the one to men and the other to women, Jung was setting up his theory to show fundamental (that is, archetypal) differences between the sexes. While he would often say that all humans beings share the same archetypes, in this instance he is saying that men have one and women another. Had Jung not wanted to do this he could easily have used the same term for both. Or he could have invented a neutral term, such as “anime.” He did not, however, and this is significant. How and why are men different from women in this essential inner way?

Jung argues that both genders have both masculine and feminine components and qualities. In some passages he links this to the fact that each has both masculine and feminine genetic material. Their empirical differences are only a matter of degree. In this emphasis he is perhaps a protofeminist. Jung seems to avoid dividing the human race into two clearly different gender groups with little in common. In his theory, both men and women are both masculine and feminine. However, these qualities are distributed differently. And this difference is archetypal, not societal or cultural. It is not a difference, in other words, that can be erased by changes in social policy. In this respect he runs afoul of at least those contemporary feminists who want to insist on little or no essential psychological difference between men and women. Jung says that men are masculine on the outside and feminine on the inside, and that women are the other way around. Women are relational and receptive in their ego and persona, and they are hard and penetrating on the other side of their personality; men are tough and aggressive on the outside and soft and relational within. Take away the personas of male and female adults, and the perception of gender will be reversed. Women will be harder and more controlling than men, and men will be more nurturing and relational than women.

Statistically at least, if not for each individual, Jung’s definition appears to be the rule. If politics are guided by perceptions at the persona level, which is about as much as people will reveal to pollsters, the campaigns of savvy public officials are geared to the view that to win the votes of women they must show compassion, sentiment, and a desire for unity and tolerance; if they are after the male vote they must demonstrate logic, competitiveness, toughness, and moral judgment. On the other hand, according to Jung, the inner worlds of men and women—their hidden personalities, their unconscious other selves—would be the exact opposite of this. In other words, human beings are more complex than public appearance and polls make out. When women look within, they come upon (and reveal to those intimately involved with them) logic, competitiveness, toughness, and moral judgment aplenty. Likewise men show compassion, sentiment, and a desire for unity and tolerance. In part, it is this complexity of human beings that Jung is trying to sort out with his theory of anima and animus.

In his 1921 definition of anima and animus, Jung offers some generalizations from his own observation and experience. These give a glimpse of what he would focus on and emphasize in many of his other later writings. “As to the character of the anima, my experience confirms the rule that it is, by and large, complementary to the character of the persona. The anima usually contains all those common human qualities which the conscious attitude lacks.” He had not yet at this point put his notion of shadow in place. This distinction between shadow and anima/us will be sorted out later, and the shadow will take up many of the contents that are complementary to the persona but are excluded from conscious identity because they are incompatible with the persona image. In this passage, Jung is thinking about the type of counter-persona that the shadow will later describe, rather than about complementary attitudes toward outer and inner objects. “The anima usually contains all those common human qualities which the conscious attitude lacks. The tyrant tormented by bad dreams, gloomy forebodings, and inner fears is a typical figure ... his anima contains all those fallible human qualities his persona lacks. If the persona is intellectual, the anima will quite certainly be sentimental.”  While these features would later be assigned to the shadow, it is this line of thought that leads to the gender issue: “The complementary character of the anima also affects the sexual character, as I have proved to myself beyond a doubt. A very feminine woman has a masculine soul, and a very masculine man has a feminine soul.” Here it is only because the anima/animus structure is seen as complimentary to the persona that the gender features become included in its image. If a man’s persona contains the qualities and features commonly associated with masculinity in a particular culture, then the features of personality that do not conform with that image will be suppressed and gathered together in the complementary unconscious structure, the anima. The anima then contains the features that are typically identified as feminine in that culture. So a man very masculine in the persona will have be equally feminine in the anima.

But what about women who are not very feminine and men who are not very masculine in their personas? Does a not-very-feminine woman have a nonmasculine animus, and a not-very-masculine man have a nonfeminine anima? Jung would be obliged to follow this line of thought, given his premises. Some individuals may not be very much internally polarized between masculine and feminine features. The more androgynous style of recent decades has clearly moved away from the classic gender polarization of macho males and passive females. Women dress and behave in more masculine ways than they did in earlier generations, and many men are similarly more feminine in their personas than their forefathers were. How does this affect the features of the anima and animus? As the predominant collective images for correct male and female dress and behavior change, the inner images of anima and animus would also shift accordingly. According to the rule, whatever is left out of the conscious adaptation to the regnant culture of the individual person is relegated to the unconscious and will collect around the structure that Jung named anima/us. For an extremely effeminate man the inner attitude (anima) will be masculine in quality because this is what has been left out of the persona adaptation.

What do these gender qualities actually mean, then, when it comes to defining the nature and quality of the inner attitude, the anima and animus? Masculine has been almost universally defined by such adjectives as active, hard, penetrating, logical, assertive, dominant; feminine has been widely defined as receptive, soft, giving, nourishing, relational, emotional, empathic. Whether housed in a male or female body, these categories of attributes seem to remain stable. The debate is whether these categories should be associated with gender. Some women are more masculine than feminine in their personas, some men more feminine than masculine, but this does not change their genders as biological females and males. The Chinese terms Yin and Yang have been proposed as more suitable and neutral terms for these groups of attributes, and they might be used in exchange for the terms masculine and feminine. Either way we are speaking of the same qualities. Taking off from there, Jung would say that the inner attitude shows the qualities that are left out in the persona: if a person is Yang in the persona, he or she will by Yin in the anima/us structure. But the inner attitude, because it is in the unconscious, is less under the control of the ego and is less refined and differentiated than the persona is. So it is an inferior Yang that appears in a Yin-dominated persona individual, and an inferior Yin that crops up in unguarded moments of a Yang-dominated consciousness.

Thus a very feminine woman has a masculine soul, but not a very refined one. In her relationship to the world she holds a distinctive and marked feminine attitude, which we recognize and describe as receptive, warm, nurturing, and embracing. Within that person there is a very different inner attitude: hard, critical, aggressive, domineering. The inner face of that very feminine-looking woman reveals a personality made of steel. Similarly the very masculine appearing man, who is hard-driving, tough-minded, detached, and aggressive contains an inner personality that is sentimental, touchy, easily wounded, and vulnerable. The macho man loves his mother, loves his daughter, loves his horse, but refrains from admitting it (even to himself), and in public he will shun those feelings although in private he may give way occasionally and blubber into his beer. “This contrast is due to the fact that a man is not in all things wholly masculine, but also has certain feminine traits. The more masculine his outer attitude is, the more his feminine traits are obliterated: instead, they appear in his unconscious. This explains why it is just those very virile men who are most subject to characteristic weaknesses; their attitude to the unconscious has a womanish weakness and impression-ability. Conversely, it is often just the most feminine women who, in their inner lives, display an intractability, an obstinacy, and a willfulness that are to be found with comparable intensity only in a man’s outer attitude. These are masculine traits which, excluded from the womanly outer attitude, have become qualities in her soul.” It is obvious that Jung is not speaking here of the inner masculine and feminine in their highest and most developed forms but rather as caricatures, inferior versions of masculinity and femininity that are based on undeveloped parts of the individual’s personality.

## The Development of the Anima/us

It is precisely the above lack of development and inferiority, however, that gives the anima and animus such potential for further development in the psyche. Because the persona is based on collective values and features—whatever happens to be “in” in the way of male and female behavior and attitudes at a given moment in culture—the potential for becoming unique as an individual resides not in the persona but elsewhere in the psyche. As long as a person’s ego-consciousness is identified with the persona and feels at one with it, there is no room for qualities of personality and expression of individuality that would depart from the collective images. The impulse to be an individual is suppressed (or repressed altogether) for the sake of adaptation, in order to “fit in.” What these individual qualities may be in a particular case cannot be determined by examining the persona. They may be somewhat included in the persona presentation or they may be almost completely excluded. “This is a fundamental rule which my experience has borne out over and over again ... as regards individual qualities, nothing can be deduced about them [from the persona] ... We can only be certain that when a man is identical with his persona, his individual qualities will be associated with the anima.”

This is the man in the gray flannel suit, who rides the train to work every morning and is so closely identified with his collective role that he has no personality outside of its framework. His inherent uniqueness will show up in the anima: he will be (perhaps secretly) attracted by extremely unconventional women because they carry the anima projection for him, they portray his soul, they capture his spirit of adventure and daring. Precisely the same rule holds true for women: when they are collective and conventional in their persona presentations, they harbor a secret inner lover (often unconscious to them) who is anything but the portrait of their conventional mate. When he appears he will mesmerize them and lead them into abandon. This fundamental rule of the psyche can be observed operating in life, and it is portrayed in countless novels, operas, and films. The outcome of an actual encounter with someone who is a carrier of the anima or animus projection “frequently gives rise in dreams to the symbol of psychic pregnancy, a symbol that goes back to the primordial image of the hero’s birth. The child that is to be born signifies the individuality, which, though present, is not yet conscious.” The real psychic purpose of the conventional man’s affair with his very unconventional anima woman is to produce a symbolic child, which represents a union of the opposites in his personality and is therefore a symbol of the self.

It is this encounter of the ego with the anima or animus that Jung thought was so rich with potential for psychological development. The meeting with the anima/us represents a connection to the unconscious even deeper than that of the shadow. In the case of the shadow, it is a meeting with the disdained and rejected pieces of the total psyche, the inferior and unwanted qualities. In the meeting with the anima/us, it is a contact with levels of the psyche which has the potential to lead into the deepest and highest (at any rate the furthest) reaches that the ego can attain.

In order to pursue this intuition, however, Jung had to change course and begin to redefine the nature of the anima/us. The shadow does not usually lead one much past the parts of the psyche rejected from the persona, unless it takes one to an encounter with absolute evil. The anima/us structure, on the other hand, has the potential to bridge to the self, a much further reach. The anima/us cannot then be simply the converse of the persona, a sort of negative reflection of the collective attitudes of the times. It must be more deeply anchored in the collective unconscious and in the structures of archetype and archetypal image. Its roots must extend further out and down into the depths than those of the shadow. In 1921 Jung was just on the verge of tracking these trails into the hinterland of the collective unconscious. He gives a hint of what is to come: “in the same way as the persona, the instrument of adaptation to the environment, is strongly influenced by environmental conditions, the anima is shaped by the unconscious and its qualities.” Here the concept of the anima changes a small but highly significant bit. Instead of simply being the complement of the persona, and therefore critically shaped and colored by what is in the persona, the anima is now seen as shaped by the unconscious and its qualities. Later, when Jung comes to conceive of the animus and anima as archetypal images which receive their forms from the spiritual end of the psychic spectrum (see chapter 4), he will conclude that the anima/us is shaped by the archetype more than by the collective consensus of the time. The anima and animus will become enduring forms of psyche, powers that shape the psyche as much as they are shaped by it, dynamic forces that can break the forms of culture and impose their own agendas upon a surprised and sometimes unwilling ego.

“Every man carries within him the eternal image of woman; not the image of this or that particular woman, but a definitive feminine image,” Jung writes in 1925 in an essay on marriage. This has come to be the more or less standard definition of the anima in analytical psychology. Here Jung is pointing to the archetypal nature of the anima/us, and he leaves aside the way in which this inner attitude is complementary to the persona. He goes on to say that this is “an hereditary factor of primordial origin” and offers an image of woman *as she appears to man* and not as she is in herself. Similarly, the animus is a woman’s internal image of the male personality. The images, thoughts, and assumptions generated by these internal structures are behind all the confusions and obfuscations between men and women. They misunderstand one another because they are often relating to *images* of the other sex rather than to actual people. It is evident how these inner structures can distort reality and cause misperceptions between otherwise fairly rational and well-meaning individuals. The male and female images housed in the unconscious of each gender respectively are primordial and relatively unchanged by historical and cultural circumstance. They are close to permanently stable images that repeat their portraits in individual human psyches from generation to generation. What confused Plato and Socrates about women is the same as the anima image that creates pitfalls for men today. And the expectations and longings that filled the heart of Mary Magdalene continue to infiltrate the consciousness of modern women in spite of the vast cultural and social distances that separate them. The anima/us is the great creator of illusion that provides chuckles for the jaded and heartbreak for the naive.

“The projection-making factor is the anima, or rather the unconscious as represented by the anima,” Jung writes from the vantage point of old age in 1950 in *Aion,* where he attempts to offer once again a definition of this elusive inner factor. Jung had always held that projections are created by the unconscious and not by the ego. We are not responsible for our projections, only for not becoming conscious of them, taking them back, or analyzing them. They occur spontaneously and create a view of the world and of reality that is based on unconscious images and structures rather than on tested perceptions of reality. Jung now locates the origin of all projections in the anima/us, thereby highlighting the dynamic and active nature of this psychic factor.

We are of course projecting constantly, and our views of life, of other people, and of the way the world is constructed are made up quite importantly of unconscious contents that are projected into the environment and clung to as absolute verities. The anima/us, Jung says in this passage, is like Maya, the Indian Goddess who creates illusory worlds, and the ego ends up inhabiting a world that is largely based on projections. Jung had learned this not primarily from study of Eastern religions but from his own firsthand experience as a psychiatrist and analyst. It is amazing how distorted some people’s views really are. And it is equally remarkable that all of us believe in our own views absolutely even when we find serious flaws in them. It is rare that we question a set of basic assumptions.

## Raising Consciousness with Anima/us

The anima/us image, based on the archetypal structures underlying the psyche, assumes particular shape and form by being filtered through the psychic system and perceived by ego consciousness. If the image of the shadow instills fear and dread, the image of the anima/us usually brings excitement and stimulates desire for union. It engenders attraction. Where there is anima/us, we want to go, we want to be a part of it, we want to join it, if we are not too timid or afraid of adventure. The charismatic charge that electrifies an audience when a great orator casts his spell enlists the anima/us and constellates its presence. The audience wants to believe, and individuals will follow the clarion call to action. A perception of reality is created and conviction follows upon the strong emotional command of the anima/us. The anima/us is therefore transformative.

For purposes of psychological development and increase of consciousness, however, the essential ego action is to engage the anima/us in a dialectical process and not to follow the call immediately to action. This process of dialogue and confrontation is called by Jung an *Auseinandersetzung.* This is a German word that means literally “taking something to pieces” and refers to the process that takes place when two people strongly engage one another in dialogue or negotiation, neither one fleeing the conflict. As they stand head to head and have it out physically or verbally, the differences between them that were at first gross and barely articulate become more differentiated. Lines are drawn, distinctions made, clarity eventually achieved. What began as a highly emotional confrontation turns into a conscious relationship between two very different personalities. Perhaps an agreement is reached, a contract drawn up and signed.

So it is with the engagement between ego and anima/us. This is the work of raising consciousness, of becoming aware of projections, of challenging our most romantic and carefully guarded illusions. To have an *Auseinandersetzung* with the anima/us is to dismember the illusory world of unconscious fantasy. It is also to allow oneself to experience most profoundly the heights and depths of one’s own mental universe, the unconscious assumptions that keep us salivating for more when we are already overfed, that keep us lusting although we should have long since been satisfied, that drive us to repeat endlessly the emotionally engorged patterns in the iron chain of stimulus-response sequences. Dungeons and dragons, myths and fairytales, romantic excess and sarcastic recriminations are all a part of the world woven in our psychic interiors by the anima/us. At most we may feign to give it up while clinging all the more tenaciously to our most precious self-deceptions and illusions. “What we can discover about them [anima and animus] from the conscious side is so slight as to be almost imperceptible. It is only when we throw light into the dark depths of the psyche and explore the strange and tortuous paths of human fate that it gradually becomes clear to us how immense is the influence wielded by these two factors that complement our conscious life.” This is perhaps a reply to Freud who held that character was fate. In Jung’s view, the anima/us is fate. We are guided to our fates by the images of archetypal powers far beyond our conscious will or knowledge.

In the *Aion* text, which is arguably the master text on anima/us in Jung’s writings, Jung also acknowledges the centrality of relationship in the process of becoming conscious of the hidden territory within our psyches. “I should like to emphasize,” he writes, “that the ... shadow can be realized only through a relation to a partner, and anima and animus only through a relation to a partner of the opposite sex, because only in such a relation do their projections become operative.” As I said earlier, we might need to revise this point in light of contemporary developments in gender identity, where the anima/us images are sometimes carried by members of the same sex. Nevertheless, the point is that it is in emotional relationships that these developments of consciousness become possible. Becoming conscious is not a project carried out in isolation, although it does require a good deal of introspection to bring it to its full flowering. But experience must precede insight. The shadow is experienced in projection upon someone who captures those qualities of the personal unconscious. Similarly the anima/us is captured in projection by a person who bears its traits and features to some quite important extent, a person who can evoke the response of the unconscious from this sector. When this happens, Jung continues, the psychic constellation is such that three figures become relevant: “The recognition of the anima gives rise, in a man, to a triad, one third of which is transcendent: the masculine subject, the opposing feminine subject, and the transcendent anima. With a woman the situation is reversed.” This assumes a considerable degree of consciousness because generally the projection-carrier and the projection are fused, anima/us and other subjects becoming one. Here Jung assumes a degree of separation, however, such that there is (1) a conscious ego along with its personal subjectivity, (2) another person, the partner, with her/his conscious ego and personal subjectivity, and (3) the archetypal image of the anima/us. This triad is completed, Jung writes, by a fourth figure, the Wise Old Man in the male instance and the Chthonic Mother in the female. The anima/us and the wisdom figures are transcendent, in the sense of belonging essentially to the unconscious and originating in the realm of spirit, while the ego and the partner are the conscious persons involved in the emotional relationship that has stimulated this constellation. In the presence of this quaternity, we find the numinous experience of the self, as a relationship. Provided that enough consciousness prevails to see the differences between human and archetypal features in this situation of love and attraction, there is the opportunity here for a full experience of the self (see chapter 7).

The complicating feature is that this experience of the anima/ us-in-projection happens to people at many stages of psychological maturity. If it is only a matter of fascination and falling in love, it can take place in childhood between parents and children; then it happens again (classically and intensely) in adolescence; and fortunately it continues to happen as people move into adulthood. It even continues into old age (Goethe is reported to have whispered a prayer of thanks in his seventies that he was still able to fall in love with a young woman). The anima/us is eternally active in psychological life, and its absence defines the nature of depression. Beyond the sexuality of the body, this is the psyche’s sexuality. It begins before the physical organism is ready for sexual experience and continues to be vibrantly active beyond the physical body’s ability to perform the rigors of the sexual act. Yet to get the full psychological benefit of the anima/us experience, a person must have arrived at an unusually advanced level of consciousness. The ability to differentiate between projection and projection-carrier, between fantasy and reality, is rare indeed. So the realization of what Jung is speaking of—the quaternity involved in this constellation and the realization of the transcendent features in the experience—is reserved for the few individuals with the kind of subtle psychological discernment that pertains to Kundalini masters and others like them. For the rest, the anima/us is Maya, the creator of illusions, the mystifier, the trickster, the ever-receding mirage of the eternal beloved. To see through the anima/us game of illusions without recognizing the transcendent figures at work leads to cynicism and despair: The anima is truly *la belle dame sans merci.*

## Sexuality and Relationships

For good reason many people steer clear of the shoals of the anima/us experience. The native defenses of the ego hold this temptation at a distance. Little boys run away from little girls who are too powerful and attractive, knowing intuitively they are not able to meet the challenge. Grown men are sometimes wise enough to do the same, for the anima is a wrecker of conventional marriages and careers. Women too will resist the call of the Dionysian animus drawing them toward ecstasy and promises of fulfillment by abandoning themselves to love, for here also lie the dangers of dismemberment and madness. It is not without reason that many have prayed to be delivered from temptations beyond their ability to remain standing. One of Jung’s favorite illustrations of the power of the anima was Rider Haggard’s *She*, a second-rate novel that depicts an immortal *femme fatale* in the wilds of Africa whose commands must be obeyed. (“She who must be obeyed” is not simply a humorous appellation for Rumpole’s bossy wife; the phrase comes from Haggard’s novel.) She is an eternally dying and resurrecting goddess who leads men into the flames of passion and finally to their destruction. But Jung also felt that if one was able to endure the fires of emotion and passion, one could be transformed. The experience of the archetype, of the collective unconscious and its powers, can lead to a new state of consciousness in which the reality of the psyche becomes as convincing to the ego as the reality of the material world is to the senses. The anima/us, once experienced as transcendent and recognized as Maya, becomes the bridge to a wholly new apprehension of the world. The anima/us experience is the Royal Way (the *via regia)* to the self.

Jung’s anima/us theory seems in part to be a highly imaginative variation on Freud’s old theme of sexuality as the central source of libido. But in human sexuality Jung sees a good deal more than animals rutting in heat and trying to relieve themselves of tension or to pursue pleasure. Psychic attractors are involved, and when these are distinguished from the accompanying biological activity, the image emerges. This image is a psychic fact whose source lies at the archetypal end of the psychic spectrum. It is wedded to the sexual instinct, and this combination gives the anima/us its driving physical power.

Human sexuality is guided by the archetypal image, but the image is not reducible to the drive. We are attracted to certain people. Why does one choose this person for a soulmate and not another? This is governed by the images that are projected. Typically, “the animus likes to project itself upon ‘intellectuals’ and all kinds of ‘heroes’, including tenors, artists, sporting celebrities, etc. The anima has a predilection for everything that is unconscious, dark, equivocal, and unrelated [viz., at a loose end] in woman, and also for her vanity, frigidity, helplessness, and so forth.” Why do such difficult women attract men so frequently and with such ease? Why is it that strong women often do not attract men? Jung suggests that this predilection for weak and helpless women is based on an anima projection, the anima being undifferentiated and inferior in the unconscious of a strongly male-identified person. Age-old wisdom tells women that to attract a man, “Be helpless!” The anima represents the undeveloped side of a man, where he is unconsciously helpless and at loose ends, dark and equivocal. He is attracted by that. Similarly, strong women will be attracted often to weak men, sometimes fatefully, and then become filled with fantasies of saving them from alcoholism or some other decrepitude. Again, they are seeking a lost part of themselves, the animus, who appears as an inferior male in projection. Or, if she is a weak and helpless woman, her unconscious may compensate with images of male competence, and she will find herself hopelessly attracted to an heroic animus projection carrier.

Once persons get together and spend some time in each other’s company, the ensuing relationship begins showing some other typical anima-animus characteristics. In an intimate relationship, it is not only the egos of the partners that enter into the mixture of psyches; it is also the unconscious parts, and importantly the anima and animus. They have been there all along, supplying the attractors to both members of the couple, but now they may appear surprisingly different from what they looked like in the courtship stage of the relationship. Here is Jung-the-psychological-realist describing the situation: “no man can converse with an animus for five minutes without becoming the victim of his own anima. Anyone who still had enough sense of humour to listen objectively to the ensuing dialogue would be staggered by the vast number of commonplaces, misapplied truisms, clichés from newspapers and novels, shop-soiled platitudes of every description interspersed with vulgar abuse and brain-splitting lack of logic. It is a dialogue which, irrespective of its participants, is repeated millions and millions of times in all languages of the world and always remains essentially the same.” On the male side the anima becomes touchy, overly sensitive, and emotional; on the female side the animus become abusive, power-ridden, and opinionated. This is not a pretty picture and surely offers a stark contrast to the more romantic version of the *mysterium coniunctionis* (“mystical union”) of song and story. The one partner becomes possessed by the animus—an undifferentiated collection of opinions motivated by a power drive—and the other retreats into a mood that is undifferentiated and driven by the need for love. One is dogmatic, the other becomes withdrawn or emotional and starts throwing things around. It is a typical anima versus animus cat-and-dog fight.

If the emotionality and vituperation, the heat and fireworks, of this conflict dies down a bit, there is a possibility that things will have been said that are important for the couple. Once the egos are restored to their normal positions, they may even realize that some transcendent event has taken place. What was said was probably not very personal. It was more general, collective, perhaps even archetypal and universal. Perhaps there is a germ of wisdom hidden in the dark mass of material that has erupted from each partner. Perhaps some clarifications and insights can result from the storm that has now passed. This would be the work of consciousness, rising above the level of emotionality and arriving at insight and empathy. At the very least, one will have had a glimpse into the depths of oneself and of the other, into the emotional far reaches that are normally hidden behind the socialized and adapted persona.

It would of course make sense to look at Jung’s own life to amplify further the meaning the anima figure held for him. That is beyond the scope of this study. I have used some passages from his autobiography, and biographical works are in print and others are underway that give fuller depictions of his profound relationships with women. Jung once said that all psychological theory is also personal confession, and this is especially true of these areas that speak of the inner figures and personalities of the psyche such as the shadow, the anima/us, and the self. These concepts and abstract theories were based on concrete psychological experiences, much of it interpersonal and not only solitary and private. With respect to the anima, she was for Jung both a living inner reality, a true inner figure of the first rank, and she was also powerfully experienced by him in projection and in relationship. Beginning early in life with his nursemaid and extending through his romantic courtship and marriage to Emma Rauschenbach and his deep and enduring relationship with Toni Wolff, the anima was a constant companion in Jung’s inner and outer life. To him, she seemed to be the guide of his fate. And the most profound experience of the self, a concept which I will describe in the following chapter, occurred for Jung in the conjunction between man and woman, when the anima and animus were the guiding figures in their union.
