# The Psyche’s Transcendent Center and Wholeness: The Self

I was tempted to begin this book with a chapter on the self, because it is the most fundamental feature of Jung’s entire vision. It is the key to his psychological theory, and in some respects it is the piece that most sets him apart from all other figures in depth psychology and psychoanalysis. It is instructive to note that psychoanalytic theory has moved significantly in Jung’s direction over the past half century, and yet few if any other psychoanalytic theorists have ventured as far as his conception of the self in their theorizing. While many other writers today use the term self in their clinical studies and theoretical statements, none has in mind the same domain that Jung was trying to encompass with his concept. To begin with Jung’s theory of the self would have been misleading, however, historically and conceptually. It is not only the most fundamental feature of his theory, it is also the capstone. It therefore needs preparation in order to grasp its full range and importance.

For Jung the self is transcendent, which means that it is not defined by or contained within the psychic realm but rather lies beyond it and, in an important sense, defines it. It is this point about the self’s transcendence that makes Jung’s theory different from those of other self-theorists like Kohut. For Jung, the self is paradoxically not oneself. It is more than one’s subjectivity, and its essence lies beyond the subjective realm. The self forms the ground for the subject’s commonality with the world, with the structures of Being. In the self, subject and object, ego and other are joined in a common field of structure and energy. This is the point I hope will become most salient from what follows in this chapter.

The typical English usage of the word “self” makes it difficult to appreciate what Jung is getting at in his theory. As used in everyday parlance, self is equivalent to ego. When we say that someone is selfish, we mean that they are egotistical or narcissistic. But in a Jungian vocabulary, self has the opposite meaning. To say that someone is self-centered is to say that they are precisely not egotistical and narcissistic, but rather philosophical, having a wide perspective, and not personally reactive or easily thrown off balance. When the ego is well connected to the self, a person stands in relationship with a transcendent center and is precisely not narcissistically invested in nearsighted goals and short-term gains. In such persons there is an ego-free quality, as though they were consulting a deeper and wider reality than merely the practical, rational, and personal considerations typical of ego consciousness.

## Jung’s Experience of the Self

Before entering into a discussion of *Aion,* the central text of Jung’s self theory, I think it will be useful to the reader to have an impression of Jung’s original experiences that led him to postulate the existence of the self. His later theorizing sprang from his experience.

Jung’s own account of his first major experience of the self places it in the period between 1916 and 1918. During this difficult time in his life he made the major discovery that at bottom the psyche rests on a fundamental structure and that this structure is able to withstand the shocks of abandonment and betrayal which threaten to undo a person’s mental stability and emotional balance. This was the discovery of a deep, largely unconscious pattern of psychological unity and wholeness.

For Jung the experience of the self—that most impersonal of all archetypes—had a highly dramatic quality. It came out of his inner struggles and turmoil and capped a period of his life that often had him wondering if he was losing his way in a psychic wilderness. There were no maps for him to consult as he groped through a jungle of tangled emotions, ideas, memories, and images. In his autobiography, he calls this the period of “Confrontation with the Unconscious.” At the time of his momentous discovery, Jung was already well-launched into his midlife crisis. About forty-one years old, he had broken with Freud some five years earlier and had after that suffered emotional disorientation and professional uncertainty, from which he was now gradually recovering. He refers to the first half of his midlife period (1913-1916) as the time when he discovered the inner world, the anima, the plurality of unconscious images and fantasies. Throughout these years of inner exploration, Jung recorded his dreams, fantasies, and other important experiences in an elaborately detailed and illustrated document which has come to be called the “Red Book.” While struggling to sort out the images and emotions that had burst upon him from the unconscious, he had also been trying to understand how they fit together and what they meant. He had used practices such as yoga breathing to maintain his emotional equilibrium. When his emotions threatened to destroy his psychic equilibrium and sanity, he used meditation, play therapy, active imagination, and drawing to calm down. A therapist to himself, he worked out techniques (which he later would use with patients) to keep his own ego-consciousness stable in the midst of this flood of material from the unconscious.

Now, as he continued to observe, listen, and record his inner experiences, his openness increased to the archetypal end of the psychic continuum and to the spirit world into which it merges. After spending several years at the “anima level,” he began to enter into a territory that revealed the archetype of the self, the most fundamental architect of psychic wholeness and order. This discovery of the self is recounted in his autobiography and took place over the period of several years.

First there was the peculiar incident of the ringing door bell. Jung tells of how one Sunday afternoon in 1916, as he was sitting in his living room on Seestrasse in Kusnacht, he sensed a heavy emotional atmosphere in the house. The members of his household seemed tense and irritable. He did not understand why, but the air seemed charged with the presence of unseen figures. Suddenly the doorbell rang. He went to answer it, but no one was there. Yet the knocker was clearly moving. He swears he saw it move. By itself! When the maid asked who had rung the bell, Jung said he did not know since there was no one at the door. It rang again. This time the maid also saw the knocker move. He was not hallucinating. And then Jung heard the following words suggest themselves:

The dead came back from Jerusalem, where they found not what they sought. They prayed me let them in and besought my word, and thus I began my teaching ... 

He decided to write these words down. More came:

Harken: I begin with nothingness. Nothingness is the same as fullness. In infinity full is no better than empty. Nothingness is both empty and full. As well might ye say anything else of nothingness, as for instance white is it, or black, or again, it is not, or it is. This nothingness or fullness we name the PLEROMA.

Over the next few days Jung took down, as if by dictation, a Gnostic text entitled “Seven Sermons to the Dead.” This teaching, delivered in the words and under the identity of the ancient Gnostic master, Basilides, is a message that came to Jung from the archetypal realm of the psyche.

Of course one knows that Jung was very interested in Gnosticism prior to this visitation and that he had read many fragments of ancient Gnostic texts, so there were undoubtedly many connections to this visionary experience in his living room and library. Yet this was also a highly imaginative and creative new work, albeit in the form of a grandiose religious text, and it came spontaneously from the depths of Jung’s own psyche. He was not simply quoting from memory—even cryptomnesia does not account for it, since it cannot be found elsewhere in the classic texts of Gnosis. Nor was he trying deliberately to write in the style of the Gnostics. This writing was not intentional. In retrospect it can be seen that this text, which was completed in about three days, contains the seeds of many ideas that Jung would work out in the following decades in more rational intellectual and scientific terms.

This was one of many unusual psychic experiences during these years of confrontation with unconscious. At a more mundane level, Jung carried on with his life and his professional practice. This period coincided almost exactly with World War I, during which Switzerland, a neutral country, was isolated from Europe and the wider world. Travel was impossible. Like all Swiss adult men, Jung was in the Army—he was a medical officer—and he was assigned the role of commandant at the prisoner of war camp in Chateau d’Oex in the French-speaking part of the country. It must have been a more or less tedious administrative job, and he began routinely to spend some time each morning drawing circles and elaborating them as he felt inclined to do so. After this exercise he would feel refreshed and ready for the day ahead. This activity centered him, he says in his autobiography.

Some of these drawings turned into very elaborate paintings. Jung later compared them to what Tibetan Buddhists call mandalas, images that represent the cosmos, the spiritual universe of the Buddhist practitioner. (Some twenty years later on his trip to India Jung would note with great interest how people paint these traditional images on the walls of their homes or in temples in order to stay connected to cosmic spiritual powers or to fend off evil forces and influences. Mandalas have both a protective and a prayerful function.) Jung came to realize that he was reproducing a universal underlying archetypal pattern that has to do with putting things in order. This experience led him eventually to the conclusion that if a spontaneously unfolding psychic process is followed to its own logical end and is permitted to express itself fully, the goal of this process will be fulfilled, namely to manifest universal images of order and a unity. The mandala is a universal symbol that expresses the intuition of ordered wholeness. To name the archetypal factor that is operative in the psyche producing this goal and this pattern, Jung chose the term self, following the Indian Upanishads in their designation of the higher personality, the *atman.* This experience of drawing and elaborating mandalas would stay with Jung as the central experience of the self: emerging slowly, experientially, spontaneously into consciousness.

Finally, Jung recorded a dream in 1928 that represented for him the completion of his realization of the self. (Although the intensity of his midlife crisis was over by 1920, the lingering after-math continued until 1928 when Jung was fifty-two years old.) Throughout his forties Jung lived in a kind of psychological liminality, or limbo, at first intensely and deeply and then less so. At the end he had a dream in which he found himself in the English city of Liverpool. He was walking through the streets with a group of Swiss friends on a rainy night, and soon they came upon an intersection that was shaped like a wheel. Several streets radiated from this hub, and in the middle of the intersection there was a square. While everything was dark in the surrounding area, this center island was brightly lit. On it there grew a single tree, a Magnolia full of reddish blossoms. His companions did not seem able to see the beautiful tree, but Jung was overcome with the beauty of it. Later he interpreted this dream to mean that he had been given a vision of the center, the self, an image of unearthly beauty that is located in the “pool of life” (Liverpool). From this dream experience, he writes, “emerged a first inkling of my personal myth.” In this key passage, Jung declares the self to be the center of his personal myth. He later conceived of it as the prime archetype (the One) from which all the other archetypes and archetypal images ultimately derive. The self is the magnetic center of Jung’s psychological universe. Its presence pulls the ego’s compass needle to true north.

## Jung’s Definition of the Self

Turning now from Jung’s own personal experience of the self to his theory, a few remarks will pave the way for the discussion of the key text on this subject, *Aion*. Jung’s writings on the self are scattered throughout his *Collected Works* in the volumes and essays that were published after 1925 (the year of Jung’s 50th birthday), and of these the most focused on this subject is *Aion.* This work was published in 1951 and is, according to the editors of the volume, “a long monograph on the archetype of the self.” Its subtitle, “Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self,” makes the same point. The book’s title is taken from the ancient religion of Mithraism, where Aion is the name of a god who rules over the astrological calender and thus over time itself. The title therefore suggests a factor that transcends the time/space continuum that governs ego-consciousness.

The first four chapters of *Aion* function as a brief general introduction to Jung’s psychology, covering the concepts of ego, shadow, and animus/anima, and a first pass at the theory of the self. From there he enters into discussions of many symbolic representations of the self, primarily in the Biblical traditions and the relevant “heresies” such as Gnosticism and alchemy. The work concludes with a grand theoretical summation in the final chapter entitled “The Structure and Dynamics of the Self.” Jung’s argument, often difficult to follow as he threads his way through astrology, Gnosticism, alchemy, theology, and various traditional symbol systems, claims that this transcendent factor of the psyche—which we now call the self—has been studied and experienced by many people in earlier times, and their accounts of it in symbolic terms can be useful for grasping its nature and energy.

The introductory chapter on the self begins as follows: “the self ... is completely outside the personal sphere, and appears, if at all, only as a religious mythologem, and its symbols range from the highest to the lowest ... anyone who wants to achieve the difficult feat of realizing something not only intellectually, but also according to its feeling-value, must for better or worse come to grips with the anima/animus problem in order to open the way for a high union, a *coniunctio oppositorum.* This is an indispensable prerequisite for wholeness.” At this point in the text, Jung introduces “wholeness,” a term that is equivalent to the self. Wholeness results, practically speaking, when the self is realized in consciousness. In fact, this is not completely achievable, since the polarities and opposites resident in the self are forever generating more and new material to integrate. Nevertheless, practicing wholeness on a regular basis is the way of the self, Jung’s version of living in Tao. “Although ‘wholeness’ seems at first sight to be nothing but an abstract idea (like anima and animus), it is nevertheless empirical in so far as it is anticipated by the psyche in the form of spontaneous or autonomous symbols. These are the quaternity or mandala symbols, which occur not only in the dreams of modern people who have never heard of them, but are widely disseminated in the historical records of many peoples and many epochs.”

Symbols of the self determine the focus of *Aion*. As Jung sees it, they are ubiquitous and autochthonic (that is, innate and spontaneous), and they are delivered to the psyche through the archetypal psychoid region from the archetype per se. The self, a transcendent nonpsychological entity, acts on the psychic system to produce symbols of wholeness, often as quaternity or mandala images (squares and circles). “Their significance as symbols of unity and totality is amply confirmed by history as well as by empirical psychology. What at first looks like an abstract idea stands in reality for something that exists and can be experienced, that demonstrates its a priori presence spontaneously. Wholeness is thus an objective factor that confronts the subject independently of him.”

In this passage, Jung goes on to describe a hierarchy of agencies within the psyche. As the anima or animus has “a higher position in the hierarchy than the shadow, so wholeness lays claim to a position and a value superior to those of the syzygy.” At the most immediate level is the shadow, and over this the anima/animus—the syzygy—stands as a superior authority and power. Presiding over the entire psychic government is the self, the ultimate authority and highest value: “unity and totality stand at the highest point on the scale of objective values because their symbols can no longer be distinguished from the *imago Dei.”* Jung contends that every one of us bears the God-image—the stamp of the self—within ourselves. We carry the mark of the archetype: typos means a stamp impressed on a coin, and *arche* means the original or master copy. Each human individual bears an impression of the archetype of the self. This is innate and given.

Since each of us is stamped with the *imago Dei* by virtue of being human, we are also in touch with “unity and totality [which] stand at the highest point on the scale of objective values.” When needed, this intuitive knowledge can come to our assistance: “experience shows that individual mandalas are symbols of order, and that they occur in patients principally during times of psychic disorientation or re-orientation.” When people spontaneously draw or dream about mandalas, this suggests to the therapist that there is a psychological crisis in consciousness. The appearance of self symbols means that the psyche needs to be unified. This was Jung’s own experience. During his most disoriented time, he spontaneously began drawing mandalas. Compensatory symbols of wholeness are generated by the self when the psychic system is in danger of fragmenting. This is the point at which the archetype of the self intervenes in an effort to unify it.

The emergence of unity symbols and of integrative movements in the psychic system generally are marks of the action of the self archetype. The self’s task seems to be to hold the psychic system together and to keep it in balance. Its goal is unity. This unity is not static but dynamic, as we shall see in the next chapter on individuation. The psychic system is unified by becoming more balanced, interrelated, and integrated. The self’s influence on the psyche as a whole is mirrored by the influence of the ego upon consciousness. Like the self, the ego too has a centering, ordering, unifying function, and its goal is to balance and integrate functions insofar as this is possible, given the existence of the complexes and defenses. In chapter 1, I discussed the ego as the center of consciousness and the locus of will. It has the ability to say “I” and “I am,” or “I think” or “I will.” At another stage, it becomes a self-conscious psychic entity and able to say not only “I am” but “I know that I am.” It may be the case, although one cannot be certain, that the self also knows that it is. Does the archetype possess self-awareness? Does it know that it is? Jung discovered what he thought to be a kind of consciousness in the archetypes. When archetypal images invade the ego, for example, and take possession of it, they have a voice, an identity, a point of view, a set of values. But is there self-awareness within the archetypal unit itself? One myth strongly points to such awareness. When Moses confronted God at the burning bush and asked, “Who are you?” the archetypal voice replied, “I am that I am.” Whatever this may mean theologically, it seems to demonstrate self-reflexive consciousness in the archetype.

Jung believed that a privileged relation exists between the ego and the self. It may be that the self has the highest form of self-awareness and shares this with the ego, which in turns shows this property most strongly within the more familiar regions of the psychic world. Because of this intimate connection between ego and self, it might be argued that the self is in fact an image of the ego, a kind of super-ego or ideal of the ego. Jung, however, wanted to insist that he had discovered something psychoid—psyche—like but not strictly only psychic—that exists in a realm beyond the psyche itself, something that affects the psychic system through its images, mental contents, and mythological ideas, and through revelatory experiences such as that of Moses at the burning bush or receiving the Law on Mount Sinai, but is not a product of the ego or of social constructions.

## Symbols of the Self

Although the entire book is about the self, *Aion* has two chapters specifically on this subject. The first of these, chapter 4, which we have just considered, is introductory. The book’s final chapter, on the other hand, is perhaps Jung’s most sophisticated and complete statement on the self. It assumes the intervening discussion of symbols from Gnosticism, astrology, and alchemy, which have threaded through manifestations of culture in the West over the past two millennia.

This chapter begins by referring to the self as the archetype underlying ego-consciousness. Ego-consciousness is the point of individual will, awareness, and self-assertion. Its function is to look out for the individual and to keep him or her alive. The ego—as I described in chapter 1—is a complex that is organized around a dual center, a trauma and an archetype (the self). To talk about the self, Jung now lists a host of possible images for it. Some of them are images that manifest in dreams or fantasies, and others appear in relationships and interactions with the world. Geometrical structures, such as the circle, the square, and the star, are ubiquitous and frequent. These may appear in dreams without drawing special attention to themselves: people sitting around a round table, four objects arranged in a square space, a city plan, a home. Numbers, particularly the number four and multiples of four, indicate quaternity structures. (Jung was not so fond of the number three, which he regards as only a partial expression of the self: three “should be understood as a defective quaternity or as a stepping stone towards it.” He is more positive about threes and trinities in other passages, but mainly he views them as only a theoretical approximation to wholeness that leaves out the concreteness and groundedness which wholeness requires.)

Other self images are gemstones, like diamonds and sapphires, stones that represent high and rare value. Yet further self representations include castles, churches, vessels and containers, and of course the wheel, which has a center and spokes radiating outward ending in a circular rim. Human figures that are superior to the ego personality, such as parents, uncles, kings, queens, princes and princesses, are also possible self representations. There are also animal images that symbolize the self: the elephant, the horse, the bull, the bear, the fish, and the snake. These are totem animals that represent one’s clan or people. The collective is greater than the ego personality.

The self may also be represented by organic images, such as trees and flowers, and by inorganic images such as mountains and lakes. Jung also mentions the phallus as a self symbol. “Where there is an undervaluation of sexuality the self is symbolized as a phallus. Undervaluation can consist in an ordinary repression or in overt devaluation. In certain differentiated persons a purely biological interpretation and evaluation of sexuality can also have this effect.” Jung blames Freud’s excessively rationalistic attitude for his overemphasis on sexuality. This led Jung to adopt a mystical attitude toward this instinct.

The self contains opposites and “has a paradoxical, antinomial [amoral] character. It is male and female, old man and child, powerful and helpless, large and small. [He might also have added, good and evil.] It is quite possible that the seeming paradox is nothing but a reflection of the enantiodromian changes of the conscious attitude which can have a favourable or an unfavourable effect on the whole.” In other words, the form in which the self is represented is influenced by the conscious attitude of the person regarding it. Changes in the conscious attitude could bring about shifts in the features of the self symbol.

As he moves toward his summary statement, Jung begins to draw diagrams of the self by which he hopes to clarify his vision. The diagrams in paragraphs 390 and 391 of *Aion* are attempts to summarize a vast amount of material. It is somewhat unusual for Jung to diagram his thought, but he is reaching for a level of complexity and intelligibility that may be beyond human grasp. The first diagram shows what might be called a cross-sectional view of levels in the self.

!

Each level is built of a quaternity, and each of them represents complexity and wholeness at that level. The image of the four quaternities, which are stacked in an order that ascends from material to spiritual poles on a continuum, expresses totality and wholeness.

What appear as quaternities from one viewpoint are, from another angle, three-dimensional six-pointed figures attached to each other end to end.

!

A. The Anthropos Quaternio

!

B. The Shadow Quaternio

Each of these three-dimensional double pyramids shares a common point with the one above and below itself. As arranged in a stack of four, there is a line that divides them in half—the Christus—Diabolos line—above which are the Homo and Anthropos quaternities and below which fall the Lapis and Rotundum quaternities. The circle at the Homo position locates the position of ego-consciousness. Directly above it rises the Anthropos quaternity, an expression of ideal wholeness at the spiritual level. This is symbolized by the Gnostic Anthropos or Higher Adam, an ideal figure. Jung states that the present historical age, consisting of the last two thousand years, began with an emphasis on this spiritual quaternity. Man was regarded as a spiritual being in the image of Christian ideal spiritual image projected onto a historical figure, Jesus of Nazareth. The metamorphosis of Jesus into the Christ was the result of people projecting onto this figure their own spiritual higher (Anthropos) selves.

Below the Homo circle (ego-consciousness) lies a quaternity that represents the shadow of the one above it. It rests on the circle of the Serpent. This “lower self” mirrors the “higher self” above it, but darkly. Shadow figures occupy each of the four points of the quaternity (the lower Jethro versus the higher Jethro, etc.). Jung calls this the Shadow quaternity. It corresponds point for point to the Anthropos quaternity above it and represents a less idealized expression of the same wholeness. From the Shadow the trajectory continues downward: from spirit to instinct and on down into matter itself. The Serpent point signifies the base of the Shadow and connects it to the material world.

The shadow is the inferior personality, the lowest levels of which are indistinguishable from the instinctuality of animals. This connects our ideal spiritual wholeness to our biological animal nature. A person who is not connected in consciousness to this quaternity lives in the head, in a realm of intellectual and spiritual ideals that has little relation to everyday life or to the biological stratum of existence. A person identified with and living primarily out of the Shadow quaternity, on the other hand, is more or less limited to consciousness at the level of animal existence: the survival of the individual (nourishment) and of the species (sexuality), a state of spiritual and moral underdevelopment.

The serpent symbolizes the self in its strongest and most blatant paradoxicality. On the one hand, it represents everything that is “snaky” in human nature: cold-blooded instincts of survival, territoriality, base physicality. On the other hand, it symbolizes the wisdom of the body and the instincts—somatic awareness, gut intuitions and instinctual knowledge. The serpent has traditionally been a paradoxical symbol, referring both to wisdom and to evil (or the temptation to do evil). The serpent therefore symbolizes the most extreme tension of opposites within the self.

!

C. The Paradise Quaternio

Continuing downward, the Paradise Quaternio represents a descent into the level of organic material processes. Human beings share this level not only with animals but with plants. This refers to the physical fact that organic life is organized around the nature of the carbon atom and its properties. Organic chemistry is the scientific discipline that studies this level of human existence systematically. And below that lies the Lapis quaternity, which is the absolute physical base of being. At this level, the chemical elements and atomic particles must forge some kind of unity and organization, interacting in such a way as to produce a stable creature that can maintain physical equilibrium sufficient for life at the organic and psychic and spiritual levels.

!

D. Lapis Quaternio

This level, which underlies the psyche and the organic body, passes into the inorganic realm, indeed all the way down to the molecular level. By the time the structure of the self arrives at the level of the rotundum, it has reached the level of pure energy itself, which passes through the atomic level into and past the subatomic level. The rotundum, Jung says, is an abstract transcendental idea: the idea of energy.

The psyche proper is left behind at the Christus-Diabolus line, that is at the Serpent Quaternio. That line is equivalent to the psychoid boundary where psyche merges into matter. Although the serpent is somewhat psychic, or quasi-psychic, being cold-blooded it represents an energy that is also very distant from ego-consciousness and from the personal will. It shows movement and a type of consciousness, but one very far from human ego-consciousness. The serpent represents the autonomic nervous system. There is wisdom in the body, but its consciousness consists only of flickers of awareness that might be read and interpreted by the ego. On the other hand, the body may well be responsible for some dreams. The serpent’s ambiguity as a symbol derives either from the ego’s ambivalence towards it—because we are attached to the higher anthropos level, to our ideals, and therefore in conflict with our body’s instincts—or from its capacity to arouse the fear of losing contact with the higher levels of consciousness, which would be destructive. The serpent level is a consciousness-creator, and in this it represents the psychization process.

Penetrating through the inorganic level leads to the realm of pure energy, which modern physics has also discovered. This comes about by continuing to move ever further into matter until one finally arrives at a point that dissolves into pure energy. But energy is so intangible. In fact, it is an idea, an abstraction, a concept used to describe something that cannot be observed directly, though it can be measured by its effects. Psychic energy, as we saw in chapter 3, is for Jung the lifeforce, the vitality we bring to our projects, the interest we take in life and in others. It is a power to reckon with, as anyone who has ever suffered from its absence in a clinical depression knows only to well. It can move mountains, but it is nebulous and unfathomable, too. So the descent through the layers of psyche from the highest levels of idea and ideal and image through the concreteness of the ego’s existence and the body’s reality into the chemical and molecular composition of our physical being leads finally to pure energy and back into the realm of ideas, which is the world of *nous,* of mind, of spirit. Thus the quaternities touch at the poles of their greatest opposition, at the extremes of spirit and matter. Jung drew this as dynamic circulation:

!

The arrows move in a circle, and eventually Anthropos and Rotundum come together again at the top.

## The Self as Central Mystery of the Psyche

It is obvious from Jung’s writings that unity and totality were his highest values and that the self formed his personal myth. But it is a myth that he attempted to ground in evidence and theory. More correctly, the theory of the self—the concept that there is a transcendent center that governs the psyche from outside of itself and circumscribes its entirety—was a means that Jung used to account for basic psychological phenomena such as the spontaneous appearance of circles or mandalas, the self-regulating functioning of the psyche in what he called “compensation,” the progressive development of consciousness through the life span in what he called “individuation,” and the existence of numerous polarities evident in psychological life that form coherent structures and generate energy. Jung has been criticized by some conservative theologians for transforming the self into a God-concept and then worshipping at the shrine which he himself created. He would likely counter such an accusation by arguing that, as an empirical scientist, he was simply observing facts and trying to account for their existence and for their relation to one another. To him the concept of the self offered the best explanation he could provide for one of the central mysteries of the psyche—its seemingly miraculous creativity, its centering dynamics, and its deep structures of order and coherence.

The psychic system as a whole consists of many parts. Thoughts and archetypal images stand at one end of the spectrum, representations of the drives and instincts at the other end, and in between are a vast amount of personal material such as memories forgotten and recalled and all the complexes. The factor that orders this whole system and ties it all together is an invisible agent called the self. This is what creates the balances among the various other factors and ties them together into one functioning unit. The self is the center, and it unifies the pieces. But it does so at a considerable distance, like the sun influencing the orbits of the planets. Its essence lies beyond the boundaries of the psyche. It is psychoid, and it extends into regions beyond human experience and knowing. In that sense, Jung would say the self is infinite. At least we cannot say from empirical evidence where its edges may lie. This is as far as Jung would go, as he notes in his autobiography, but it is surely a good distance.
