# Emergence of the Self: Individuation

The features of Jung’s map of the soul are now in place, and with that in the foreground one is now prepared to consider the psychological journey taken in this territory over the course of a person’s lifetime. I have touched on this theme of psychological development many times already, but now with the whole theory in mind it is possible to convey the full range of what Jung called the *individuation process.* People develop in many ways throughout their lifetimes, and they undergo multiple changes at many levels. The total experience of wholeness over an entire lifetime—the emergence of the self in psychological structure and in consciousness—is conceptualized by Jung and called individuation.

Jung’s concept of individuation is based partially on the common observation that people do grow and develop in the course of the seventy or eighty years they normally live now in Western societies. *Physically,* people are born as infants, pass after several years into childhood, then enter adolescence and early adulthood. The apex of physical development generally occurs in the period of late adolescence and early adulthood, and physical growth is more or less completely achieved by the age of twenty. The healthy body is now vibrant and fully capable of biological reproduction and the heroic feats of effort and endurance required for coping with the physical world. Physically one is complete at this point, although muscles can be built up further and athletic skills sharpened and honed. After the mid-thirties, the decline and decay of bodily function becomes an increasingly important factor. One has to conserve and protect one’s body and become careful about stressing it too much lest it be damaged beyond repair. As midlife and middle age set in, the physical changes and developments that occur are often unwelcome and may cause considerable anxiety. Wrinkles, sagging stomachs and breasts, aches and pains in the joints—all of these are daily reminders of mortality. Adulthood and middle age are inevitably followed by old age, which can last a long time or only a short while. It is considered to begin in the seventies. In the next century it will no doubt become commonplace for people to live to a hundred or even to a hundred and twenty. Physical decline accelerates during this late period. The physical body grows, matures, ages, and declines in the course of the full lifespan. Physical growth and decay are governed importantly by genetic programs, which in Jung’s theory of the psyche are interfaced with archetypal patterns. Each stage of life is undergirded and supported by a set of archetypal images that shape psychological attitudes, behavior, and motivations. The infant, for example, enters the world prepared to play its role in constellating suitable mothering attitudes and behaviors in its caretaker by cooing, smiling, sucking, and generally making itself lovable. At the same time (if all goes well) the mother is prepared to assume the role of nurturing and feeding her infant. The mother-infant pair describe an archetypal pattern of human fantasy and interpersonal interaction that is primordial and has important survival value. For each stage of life there are such constellations of instinct and archetype, which result in patterns of behavior and feeling and mentation.

## The Psychological Lifespan

Jung was the first of what have come to be called *psychological* lifespan theorists. As opposed to those who suppose that the most important features of psychological and character development occur in infancy and early childhood and nothing of major import follows after that, Jung saw development as ongoing and the opportunities for further psychological development as an option for people at any age, including middle and old age. This is not to say that he minimized early development, and certainly he paid great attention to inherited features and tendencies of the personality, but the full expression and manifestation of the personality takes an entire lifetime to unfold. The self emerges bit by bit through the many stages of development described by Jung and other theorists such as Erik Erikson.

For Jung, psychological development follows the path of physical development to a point. It can be divided into the first half of life and the second. In a short but seminal article called “The Stages of Life,” he describes this developmental trajectory by using the image of the sun rising in the morning, reaching its apex at noon, and descending in the afternoon to set finally in the evening. This corresponds more or less to the pattern of the physical, but Jung adds that there are important differences, particularly with respect to the second half of life. In the beginning, consciousness arises like the dawn as the infant ego emerges from the waters of unconsciousness, and its growth and expansion and increasing complexity and power coincide with the growth and development of physical body that houses it. As the body grows and the brain matures and learning capacities develop and expand, the ego also develops its strength and capacities. A first step is to distinguish the individual body from objects in the surrounding world. This runs parallel to separating from the unconscious matrix within. The world becomes more real and concrete and is no longer simply the recipient of gross projections. Distinctions begin to be made and observed. Persons begin to move rapidly toward a capacity to function as separate entities. They begin to act as individuals, with the ability to control themselves and their environments to a reasonable degree, and to contain affect and the flow of thought as required by social standards of behavior. The ego learns, quite naturally and spontaneously, to manipulate the environment for individual survival in the ambient culture and to achieve personal benefits. It develops a persona. The healthy child’s and young person’s ego busily learns to set up its own world by becoming self-reliant and self-supporting in the terms offered by circumstance of birth. Adaptation, which is based on archetypal images such as the mother-infant unit and the later hero pattern of separation and conquest, takes place in relation to whatever the circumstances may be. Eventually, if all goes well, people are able to free themselves from dependency on their families of origin; they are able to reproduce biologically and to raise their children in a nurturing environment created by themselves; and they can play a role in the adult world of the society in which they exist. Inwardly they form an ego structure and a persona which are based upon archetypal potentials and typological tendencies. The major developmental project in the first half of life is ego and persona development to the point of individual viability, cultural adaptation, and adult responsibility for raising children.

How this is achieved and how it looks concretely depends to a large extent on the family, the social stratum, the culture and historical period into which a person is born. These factors will influence and shape many of the details in the differences between development in males and females, in the rich and the poor, in Eastern and Western individuals. These same factors also somewhat dictate the details of timing regarding the assumption of roles and responsibilities. What is universal, however, and therefore archetypal, is that every culture expects and demands of the young person the achievement of ego development and adaptation. In all cultures, the image of the hero and heroine are held up as ideals. The hero is an ideal image of someone who achieves ego development as men are supposed to emulate and admire; the heroine is an image that supplies this pattern for women. In some societies, ego development and persona development are completed for all practical purposes by the time adolescence is fully attained, in others (like modern societies, with seemingly interminable educational requirements) it may not be completed until middle age is immanent.

## Individuation

Jung used the term individuation to talk about psychological development, which he defines as becoming a unified but also unique personality, an individual, an undivided and integrated person. Individuation includes more than the project achieved ideally in the first half of life, namely ego and persona development. When that is done, another task begins to emerge, for the ideal development of ego and persona have left a great deal of psychological material out of the conscious picture. The shadow has not been integrated, the anima and animus remain unconscious, and although it has been instrumental behind the scenes, the self has been hardly glimpsed directly. But now the question becomes, How can a person achieve psychological unity in the larger sense of the term, which entails uniting conscious and unconscious aspects of the personality? It is possible to fail in the task of individuation. One can remain divided, unintegrated, inwardly multiple into deep old age and still be considered to have lived a socially and collectively successful, albeit superficial, life. Deep inner unity on a conscious level is in fact a rare achievement, although it is undoubtedly supported by a very strong innate impulse: Jung speaks of an individuation drive, not primarily as a biological imperative but rather as a psychological one. I will explain its mechanism in a moment.

Here I want to insert a cautionary note for readers who wish to compare Jung to other psychological theorists. One should be careful not to confuse Jung’s concept of individuation with notions that go under this term in other psychological theories. This is similar to the problem of comparing Jung’s concept of the self with that of other writers. In Margaret Mahler’s work, for instance, there is a strong emphasis on a process that she termed “separation/individuation.” The child separates from its mother beginning at about age two by saying “no.” That movement, built into the natural development of the psychological individual, takes place spontaneously and facilitates ego development. It is archetypally based and can be related to the early appearance and the first approximation of the archetypal pattern of the hero. For Jung this would be one aspect of lifelong individuation, but certainly it is not the whole story. The purpose of this movement toward separation is to create a psychological situation that can later proceed toward further steps of consciousness and finally to integration and unification of the personality as a whole. For Mahler, separation is not an end in itself, but only a way station. Individuation for Jung is an end in itself.

The psychological mechanism by which individuation takes place, whether we are considering it in the first or the second half of life, is what Jung called *compensation.* The fundamental relation between conscious and unconscious is compensatory. The growth of the ego out of the unconscious—driven by a powerful instinct to become separated from the surrounding world in order to adapt more effectively to the ambient environment—results in a separation between ego-consciousness and the unconscious matrix from which it comes. The tendency of the ego is to become onesided, to become excessively self-reliant. This is, as we have seen, based on the archetypal pattern of the hero. When this happens, the unconscious begins to compensate for this onesided-ness. Compensations happen classically in dreams. The function of compensation is to introduce balance into the psychic system. These compensations are tuned precisely to the present moment, and their timing is governed strictly by what consciousness is doing or not doing, by the onesided attitudes and developments of ego-consciousness. *Over time,* however, these many small daily compensations add up to patterns, and these patterns lay down the groundwork for the spiral of development toward wholeness that Jung terms individuation. Jung finds this happening especially clearly in long series of dreams: “these apparently separate acts of compensation arrange themselves into a kind of plan. They seem to hang together and in the deepest sense to be subordinated to a common goal ... I have called this unconscious process spontaneously expressing itself in the symbolism of a long dream-series the individuation process.” One can also apply this same rule to psychological development generally. The unconscious compensates ego-consciousness over the whole life span and in many ways—by slips of the tongue, forgetfulness, or miraculous revelations; by arranging accidents, disasters, love affairs, and windfalls; by generating inspirational ideas and hairbrained notions that lead to disaster. In the lifelong unfolding that Jung calls individuation, the driving force is the self, and the mechanism by which it emerges in the conscious life of the individual is compensation. This is equally true in the first half of life and in the second.

The second half of life involves a different kind of movement from what transpires in the first, however. In this second phase of individuation, the pattern’s accent is not the separation of the ego from its background and from its identifications with the milieu, but rather the unification of the whole personality. Jung would sometimes speak of the “return to the mothers,” which is a metaphorical way of saying that when ego development climaxes at midlife there is no further meaning in continuing to pursue the same old goals. In fact, some of the goals already achieved are now called into question as ultimate values, and this leads to reassessment of what has been achieved and reassessment on where further meaning lies. There is more to life than making one’s way in the world with a solid and well-structured ego and persona. “Been there, done that” sums up the mood of the midlifer. Now what? Meaning lies elsewhere, and psychic energy changes its course. The task now becomes to unify the ego with the unconscious, which contains the person’s unlived life and unrealized potential. This development in the second half of life is the classic Jungian meaning of individuation—becoming what you already are potentially, but now more deeply and more consciously. This requires the enabling power of symbols which lift up and make available contents of the unconscious that have been obscured from view. The ego is unable to carry out this larger unification of the personality by its own efforts. It needs an angel to assist.

Jung himself did not spend much time considering the issues of the first half of life after his break with Freud. He was mainly interested in people such as the fifty-three-year-old woman described in “A Study in the Process of Individuation.” Most of his own patients were adults of this type. Not seriously mentally ill, not in need of hospital or medical treatment, no longer in the early stages of their lives, these people came to Jung for wisdom and guidance in pursuing further inner development. This is not to say that some were not neurotic and in need of psychological help too, but they were not typical psychiatric patients. In fact, Jung preferred working with people whose ego-building and child-bearing years were past and whose first half of life developments had already taken place. Now was the opportunity to pursue the second great phase of the individuation process, the more explicit emergence of the self into consciousness. The methods Jung used to help them with this complex project have come to be called Jungian analysis.

Psychological change and development in adulthood and old age are in some ways more subtle than development in the first half of life. One has to observe people very carefully and at deep levels to perceive it. And sometimes there is not much to observe because the development has been so minimal. For instance, my best childhood friend’s father, at eighty-nine, had aged noticeably in the thirty years since I had last seen him. Clearly he was nearing the end of his life. Yet, although his body had altered greatly, his persona, his sense of humor, his personality had not seemingly changed very much, and on this account he was as familiar and recognizable as ever. When I met him again after all these years, I knew him immediately. To me, his personality, as I could see it and experience it, was utterly intact and the same. While his energy may have been less than it once was, he could still muster enough to carry on a lively conversation about the newest models of his favorite automobiles. He remained more or less the same person he always was, even though his body was shrunken and weaker.

Had there been any development in his psyche in the course of his adulthood after the age of 50? Had his attitudes changed? How well did I know him? I knew him as a child and then no more, so I had only a child’s view of him. I knew his persona, but that is all. To all appearances, his persona had remained intact. But as we know, there is a good more to the psyche than the persona. And yet, if the persona does not change, is there deeper change either?

Is it so subtle we can’t see it without deep interpretive, probing interviews? Perhaps his consciousness had developed dramatically beyond where it was when I knew him so long ago, but I could not see it. Jung resisted the notion that the psychological trajectory is identical to the physical, which shows mostly only decline in old age. Are there psychological compensations that outweigh the physical decay and show a different pattern?

## The Five Stages of Consciousness

To get a handle on this question of development of consciousness in the second half of life, we can apply some general measuring sticks. Jung described five stages of development of consciousness,  which I will summarize and expand a bit. We can use these to measure and assess development of consciousness in children and also in adults in their later years.

The first stage is characterized by *participation mystique*, a term borrowed from the French anthropologist, Lévy-Bruhl. Participation mystique refers to an identification between an individual’s consciousness and the surrounding world, without awareness that one is in this state; consciousness and the object with which one is identified are mysteriously the same thing. There is an absence of awareness of a difference between oneself and one’s perceptions on the one hand and the object in question on the other. To some extent, people stay in this state of participation mystique all their lives. For example, many people identify in this way with their cars. They experience all kinds of self feelings about their cars. When the car develops a problem, its owner feels sick, comes down with a cold, gets a stomach ache. We are unconsciously united with the world around us. This is what Jung called participation mystique.

Most people are connected to their families, at the beginning of life at least, by participation mystique, which is based on identification, introjection, and projection. These terms describe the same thing: an intermingling of inner and outer contents. The infant is at first literally not able to distinguish where it leaves off and where mother begins. The infant’s world is highly unified. In this sense the first stage of consciousness anticipates the final stage: ultimate unification of the parts into a whole. At the beginning, however, it is unconscious wholeness, whereas at the end the sense of wholeness is conscious.

In the second stage of consciousness, projections become more localized. After the hit-or-miss projections in the first stage, some self/other distinctions begin to appear in consciousness. The infant becomes aware of certain places where its own physical being collides with outside objects, and it begins to watch out for things and to recognize differences between self and other and among the objects in the world around it. Slowly this differentiation between self and other and between inner and outer increases and sharpens. When good subject/object differentiation exists and when self and other are distinct and clearly different, projection and participation mystique change. This does not mean that projection has been overcome, but only that it has become more localized, focusing on a few objects rather than on the whole wide world. Some objects in the world are clearly now more important and interesting than others because they carry projections and are the recipients of libidinal investment. Mother, favorite toys, bright moving objects, pets, father, other people become special and singled out and distinct. So as conscious development proceeds, differentiation takes place and projection becomes fixed on specific figures. And since projections fall on the unknown, the world offers plenty of opportunity to continue the process of projecting throughout one’s entire lifetime.

Parents are early major carriers of projection, and children unconsciously project omnipotence and omniscience onto them. These are what Jung called archetypal projections. The parents become gods, invested with powers that people have attributed to the divine. “Daddy can do anything! He’s the strongest guy in the whole world!” “Mother knows everything and can perform miracles. She also loves me unconditionally!” The shocking realization that one’s parents do not know everything and are anything but godlike usually occurs during the teenage years, and then for a time parents don’t know anything at all (another kind of projection). We also project onto siblings; this lies at the root of sibling rivalry and the kind of competitive and sometimes vicious dynamics that go on in families. Teachers and school itself also receive many projections. In fact, numerous figures in our environment become carriers of projection in the second stage of consciousness. This gives people and institutions the power to form and shape our consciousness powerfully, filling it with their knowledge and opinions and gradually replacing our own personal experience with collective opinions, views, and values. This is the process of acculturation and adaptation that takes place in childhood and adolescence.

Falling in love and getting married are typically based on massive anima and animus projections, and this leads directly into childbearing and rearing during which the children become carriers of divine child projections. Like the first stage, the second is one that no one leaves behind completely. As long as one is able to be enchanted, to feel the stir of adventure and romance, to risk all for a mighty conviction, one continues to operate out of projection onto concrete objects in the world. And for many the development of consciousness stops here. Such individuals continue to project positive and negative features of the psyche massively into the world around and to respond to the psyche’s images and powers as though they were located in external objects and persons.

If conscious development does continue—which can begin when a new phase of cognitive development leads to the ability to reach a level of abstraction that is relatively free of concretism—one becomes aware that specific projection carriers are not identical with the projections they carry. The persons who have carried the projections can step out from behind the projections, and as a result they often become de-idealized. At this stage, the world loses much of its naive enchantment. The projected psychic contents become abstract, and they now manifest as symbols and ideologies. Omniscience and omnipotence are no longer granted to human beings, but such qualities are projected onto abstract entities such as God, Fate, and Truth. Philosophy and theology become possible. Supreme values take on the numinous power once attributed to parents and teachers. The Law or the Revelation or the Teachings become invested with archetypal projections, and the concrete everyday world becomes relatively free of projections and can be interacted with as neutral. To the extent that this stage of consciousness is attained, a person becomes less vulnerable to fears of evil enemies and forces. One need not fear the reprisals of human enemies because God is in control. Or it is assumed that one can manipulate and take control of the world rationally because it obeys the laws of nature and is free of spirits and demons who might not like a highway here or a dwelling place there. One does not seem to keep running into oneself, feeling so directly the pain of what one is doing to the object.

The spontaneous empathic response to suffering among creatures in the world and to the destruction of the natural world is decreased to a considerable extent when the self/object dichotomy has reached this point. To many this does not seem to be an advance but rather a decline in consciousness. But it must be recognized that the emotional reactions of empathy manifested in the earlier developmental stages are largely based on projection and have little to do with an objective evaluation of what is happening to the object. When projections are removed from concrete objects in the world, visionary political leaders and charismatic ideologues create abstractions in the form of ideas, values, or ideologies by the projections fed into concepts that state what is of highest value and the greatest good in their perception. On the basis of these values, one can develop a set of imperatives and “oughts” that stand in place of the natural, spontaneous emotional relationships that less conscious people enjoy with the world. In place of unconscious empathy based on participation mystique or projection, one has rules that dictate duty. One does the right thing ecologically, for instance, not out of feeling but out of duty, not because one gets sick with pain for the destruction of the natural world but because of a moral imperative to sort the garbage and burn less fuel.

In this third stage of consciousness—which is I believe what my friend’s father reached, for he was a religious man in the traditional sense—there are still projections of unconscious material. But these projections are invested not so much in persons and things but in principles and symbols and teachings. Of course, these projections are still considered “real” in an almost concrete sense. God really does exist somewhere, He or She is a distinct personality, and so on. As long as one believes that an actual God will punish or reward one in the afterlife, this indicates a Stage 3 level of consciousness. The projection has simply become transferred from the human parent to a more abstract, mythological figure.

The fourth stage represents the radical extinction of projections, even in the form of theological and ideological abstractions. This extinction leads to the creation of an “empty center,” which Jung identifies with modernity. This is the “modern man in search of his soul.” The sense of soul—of grand meaning and purpose in life, immortality, divine origin, a “God within”—is replaced by utilitarian and pragmatic values. “Does it work?” becomes the primary question. Humans come to see themselves as cogs in a huge socio-economic machine, and their expectations for meaning are scaled down to bite size chunks. One settles for moments of pleasure and the satisfactions of manageable desires. Or one becomes depressed! Gods no longer inhabit the heavens, and demons are converted into psychological symptoms and brain chemical imbalances. The world is stripped of projected psychic contents. No more heroes, no more evil villains—humans become realistic. Principles are only relatively valid, and values are seen as derived from cultural norms and expectations. Everything cultural appears to be manufactured and without inherent meaning. Nature and history are regarded as the product of chance and the random play of impersonal forces. Here we arrive at the attitude and feeling-tone of the modern person: secular, atheistic, perhaps slightly humanistic. A modern person’s values seem hedged about with reservations, conditions, “maybe’s,” “not sure’s.” The modern stance is relativistic.

In this fourth stage of consciousness, it *seems* as if psychic projections have disappeared altogether. Jung points out, however, that this is undoubtedly a false assumption. In actuality the ego itself has become invested with the contents previously projected out onto others and objects and abstractions. Thus the ego is radically inflated in the modern person and assumes a secret God-Almighty position. The ego, rather than Laws or Teachings, is now the recipient of projections, good and bad. The ego becomes the sole arbiter of right and wrong, true and false, beautiful and ugly. There is no authority outside of the ego that exceeds it. Meaning must be created by the ego; it cannot be discovered elsewhere. God is not “out there” any more, it’s me! While the modern person appears to be reasonable and grounded, actually he is mad. But this is hidden, a sort of secret kept even from oneself.

Jung believed this fourth stage to be an extremely dangerous state of affairs for the obvious reason that an inflated ego is unable to adapt very well to the environment and so is liable to make catastrophic errors in judgment. While this is an advance of consciousness in a personal and even a cultural sense, it is dangerous because of the potential for megalomania. Anything goes! If I want to do it and figure I can get away with it, it must be okay. Not at all immune to the seductive persuasions of the shadow, the ego is easily led to indulge in the shadow’s lust for power and its wishes to gain total control of the world. This was Nietzsche’s Superman, and this hubris is reflected in the various social and political catastrophes of the twentieth century. Already prefigured in Dostoevski’s protagonist Raskolnikov in *Crime and Punishment,* we now witness a human being who will kill an old woman simply to see how it feels. The Stage 4 person is no longer controlled by societal conventions related either to people or values. Consequently the ego can consider unlimited possibilities of action. This does not mean that all modern people are sociopathic, but the doors for such a development are wide open. And the worst cases might be those that look most reasonable—the “best and the brightest” who think they can calculate an answer to all questions of policy and morality.

Jung said jokingly that on the street one meets people at all stages of development—Neanderthals, medieval people, moderns, people at all conceivable levels of conscious development. Living in the twentieth century does not automatically confer the status of modernity on one’s development of consciousness. Not everybody approaches Stage 4. In fact, many people cannot bear its demands. Others consider it evil. The fundamentalisms of the world insist on clinging to Stages 2 and 3 out of fear of the corrosive effects of Stage 4 and of the despair and the emptiness it engenders. But it is a real psychological achievement when projections have been removed to this extent and individuals take personal responsibility for their destinies. The trap is that the psyche becomes hidden in the ego’s shadow.

These first four stages in the development of consciousness have to do with ego development and the first half of life. The person who has achieved the self-critical and reflective ego characteristic of Stage 4 without falling into megalomaniac inflation has done extremely well in developing consciousness, and is highly evolved in Jung’s assessment. But further development in the second half of life is reserved by Jung for a fifth stage, a postmodern stage, which has to do with approaching the re-unification of conscious and unconscious. In this stage, there is conscious recognition of ego limitation and awareness of the powers of the unconscious, and a form of union becomes possible between conscious and unconscious through what Jung called the transcendent function and the unifying symbol. The psyche becomes unified but, unlike Stage 1, the parts remain differentiated and contained within consciousness. And unlike Stage 4, the ego is not identified with the archetypes: the archetypal images remain “other,” they are not hidden in the ego’s shadow. They are now seen as “in there,” unlike in Stage 3 where they are “out there” in metaphysical space somewhere, concretely, and they are not projected onto anything external.

The expression “postmodern” is mine, not Jung’s. His fifth stage of consciousness is not “postmodern” in the sense of the word as used in the arts and in literary criticism but in the sense of a stage that transcends and supersedes the “modern.” It goes beyond the modern ego that has seen through everything and does not believe in the reality of the psyche. The modern stance is a “nothing but” attitude. It is convinced that projections have been eliminated and that they were nothing but a lot of smoke and mirrors signifying nothing. The postmodern attitude recognizes that there is psychic reality in projections, but not in the concrete or material sense. If we heard so much noise in the woods, maybe something was out there after all. Not what we thought, but something real nevertheless. Can we observe it? Can we intuit it? Can we conceive of it? The psyche itself then becomes the object of scrutiny and reflection. How to capture it in our observations? How to relate to it when we do? These are the postmodern issues and questions. And so Jung’s attempts at formulating a suitable epistemology in *Psychological Types* (a “critical psychology,” as he called it) was an effort to lay the groundwork for approaching the psyche as an entity in its own right. His techniques of active imagination and dream interpretation lend themselves to interacting with the psyche directly and forming a conscious relationship with it. In this way, he was forging the tools to relate to life in a postmodern, conscious way and to take up a respectful position toward the same contents that primitive and traditional peoples find in their myths and theologies, that infants and young children project into their parents and toys and games, and that the deeply insane and psychotic mental patients see in their hallucinations and visions. The contents are common to all of us, and they make up the deepest and most primitive layers of the psyche, the collective unconscious. To approach the archetypal images and to relate to them consciously and creatively becomes the centerpiece of individuation and makes up the task of the fifth stage of consciousness. This stage of consciousness produces another movement in the individuation process. The ego and the unconscious become joined through a symbol.

Officially Jung stopped at Stage 5, although in several places he indicates that he contemplated further advances beyond it. There are suggestions in his writings for what could be considered a sixth and perhaps even a seventh stage. For example, in his Kundalini Yoga Seminar, given in 1932, Jung clearly recognizes the attainment of states of consciousness in the East that far surpass what is known in the West. While he is dubious about the prospects for Westerners to achieve similar stages of consciousness in the foreseeable future, he nevertheless does grant the theoretical possibility of doing so and even describes some of the features such stages would have. The type of consciousness revealed in Kundalini could be considered a potential Stage 7.

Backing up a bit, there is a type of consciousness that is more accessible to the West and would occupy a place between Stage 5 and this putative Stage 7. Later in his own life when he explored the structure and function of the archetypes in the context of synchronicity, Jung suggested that perhaps these apparently inner structures correspond to structures of being in the nonpsychic world. I discuss this in more detail in chapter 9, but for now it is sufficient to suggest that a possible sixth stage of consciousness would be one that takes into account the wider ecological relation between psyche and world. For Westerners, who are fundamentally conditioned by a materialistic attitude, this is a possible developmental option. Stage 6, then, could be seen as a state of consciousness that recognizes the unity of psyche and the material world. Jung moved cautiously in exploring such territories, however, because here he was clearly passing from psychology as we have known it in the West into physics, cosmology and metaphysics, areas in which he did not feel intellectually qualified and competent. Nevertheless his thinking led him step by step in that direction, and we have to grant that he showed the courage to follow his intuitions. His conversations with modern physicists like Wolfgang Pauli, with whom he published a book, were an attempt to work out some of those correlations and correspondences between the psyche and the physical world.

The five stages of development of consciousness described above are mentioned briefly by Jung in two paragraphs in the essay, “The Spirit Mercurius.” I have expanded upon that by using several other sources in his work. The theme of individuation appears throughout his written works from 1910 onwards. It is a constant preoccupation that deepens as he pursues his investigations of the structure and dynamics of the psyche. It is still on his mind in the late essay “A Psychological View of Conscience,” which was published in 1958 some three years before his death at the age of 86. Almost everything he wrote touches in one way or another upon the theme of individuation. There are two classic texts on this topic, however, and in the remainder of this chapter I will focus on them. They are “Conscious, Unconscious, and Individuation” and “A Study in the Process of Individuation.”

In the paper, “Consciousness, Unconsciousness, and Individuation,” Jung offers a succinct summary of what he means by the term individuation. He begins by saying it is the process by which a person becomes a psychological individual, which is to say, a separate undivided conscious unity, a distinct whole. I have explained some of the implications of this above, as a process of first unifying ego-consciousness and then the whole psychic system of conscious and unconscious, in order to approach what Jung would ultimately call wholeness. Wholeness is the master term that describes the goal of the individuation process, and it is the expression within psychological life of the self archetype.

The way into the unconscious, Jung points out, lies initially through emotion and affect. An active complex makes itself known through disrupting the ego with affect. This is a compensation from the unconscious and offers potential for growth. Eventually, he goes on, these affective disturbances can be traced to primordial roots in instinct, but they can also lead to images that anticipate the future. Jung posits a finalistic point of view, a movement toward a goal. In order to approach wholeness, the conscious/unconscious systems must be brought into relationship with one another: “The psyche consists of two incongruous halves which together form a whole.” He then presents a practical method that people can use to work on uniting the disparate halves of the psyche.

He is addressing what I described above as Western people in Stage 4 who “believe in ego-consciousness and in what we call reality. The realities of a northern climate are somehow so convincing that we feel very much better off when we do not forget them. For us it makes sense to concern ourselves with reality. Our European ego-consciousness is therefore inclined to swallow up the unconscious, and if this should not prove feasible we try to suppress it. But if we understand anything of the unconscious, we know that it cannot be swallowed. We also know that it is dangerous to suppress it, because the unconscious is life and this life turns against us if suppressed, as happens in neurosis.” Neurosis is based on an internal conflict that guarantees one-sidedness: The unconscious is repressed, and a person ends up in an energic impasse. With energy being used for such a narrow range of activities and for defenses against the sealed-off unconscious, much of life’s possibilities for wholeness and satisfaction are denied. Often a person becomes extremely isolated, and life becomes sterile and may reach a standstill. “Conscious and unconscious do not make a whole when one of them is suppressed and injured by the other. If they must contend, let it at least be a fair fight with equal rights on both sides. Both are aspects of life. Consciousness should defend its reason and protect itself, and the chaotic life of the unconscious should be given the chance of having its way too—as much of it as we can stand. This means open conflict and open collaboration at once. That, evidently, is the way human life should be. It is the old game of hammer and anvil: between them the patient iron is forged into an indestructible whole, an ‘individual’.” 

Forging an indestructible whole between hammer and anvil! This vivid image speaks of the nature of the individuation process as Jung understood it. Not fundamentally a quiet process of incubation and growth, it is instead a vigorous conflict between opposites. What one gains by taking up the task of facing the conflict between persona and shadow, for instance, or between ego and anima, is “mettle,” the knowledge gained through experience of the encounter *(Auseinandersetzung,* as Jung named it in German) between conscious and unconscious. “This, roughly, is what I mean by the individuation process. As the name shows, it is a process or course of development arising out of the conflict between the two fundamental psychic facts [conscious and unconscious].”

## A Case Study in Individuation

In the second essay, “A Study in the Process of Individuation,” Jung provides more concrete detail about the individuation process, at least in its earlier stages during the second half of life. In this study, he describes a woman patient who is fifty-five years old and comes to work with him after moving back to Europe from abroad. She is a “father’s daughter,” highly cultured and educated. She is unmarried, “but [she] lived with the unconscious equivalent of a human partner, namely the animus ... in that characteristic liaison often met with in women with an academic education.” He is speaking here about a modern woman. This was obviously a fascinating and instructive case for him. She was not a traditional mother and housewife who needed to develop her intellect and spiritual side (animus development) in the second half of life, which was the way he had usually thought of women’s individuation. Rather, this was a women with a very strong intellectual development and a career. But she was male-identified, and she was now on a quest to discover something about her Scandinavian mother and her motherland. She wanted to get in touch with the feminine side of her personality, which to her was unconscious.

Actually many women of this type would continue to come to Jung for treatment in the following years. This patient is similar to many women today who, having put education ahead of starting a family and having children, pursue a career, perhaps to the point where childbearing becomes a receding mirage. In 1928, however, this was still a rather unusual woman.

The patient started drawing pictures and painting. She was not a trained artist, which was an advantage for analysis because this allowed the unconscious to express itself in a more direct and spontaneous way. This patient commented that her eyes wanted to do one thing, but her head wanted her to do another, and she let the eyes have their way, indicating that the emerging new center of consciousness had a will of its own. It wanted it this way, not that way, and she could allow that to happen. *Geschenlassen* (“letting it happen”) is the way to capture the unconscious at work. Jung did not actively interpret the psychological meaning of her drawings and painting but rather participated in the process by encouraging the woman to “let it happen” as her unconscious wanted. Often he did not even understand what the pictures wanted to say beyond their manifest content. He simply encouraged her to stay with it. Gradually a story could be seen unfolding, a development took place, and this showed its purpose in due time.

Picture 1 shows the patient’s initial situation: it depicts the condition of being psychologically and developmentally stuck. A woman’s body is embedded in rock and is obviously struggling to become free. This is the condition of the patient as she begins analysis. Picture 2 shows a bolt of lightning striking the rock and separating a round stone from the others. This stone represents the woman’s core (the self). Jung comments that this picture represents the release of the self from the unconscious: “The lightening has released the spherical form from the rock and so caused a kind of liberation.” The patient associated the lightning with her analyst. The transference has begun to have its profound effect upon her personality. In the drama, Jung is represented by lightning, which is also the masculine element of her own personality that strikes and fertilizes. Jung notes the sexual overtones of this imagery.

Later in the text, Jung speaks of himself as a projection-carrier for the patient’s inferior function, intuition: “The ‘inferior’ function ... [has] the significance of a releasing or ‘redeeming’ function. We know from experience that the inferior function always compensates, complements, and balances the ‘superior’ function. My psychic peculiarity would make me a suitable projection carrier in this respect.” As the carrier for her projections, Jung’s words and presence became compensatory to the patient’s consciousness and also greatly exaggerated in their power and effectiveness. She would see him as a genius of intuition, one who knows and understands everything. This is the kind of thing a strong transference typically says to a patient. It is Jung’s intuition, then, that hits the patient like a lightning bolt and has such a profound effect on her. Because it is also the patient’s inferior function, “it hits consciousness unexpectedly, like lightning, and occasionally with devastating consequences. It thrusts the ego aside, and makes room for a supraordinate factor, the totality of a person.”

This picture therefore represents the ego being pushed aside. and the self making its first appearance. The rock that is broken loose does not represent her ego but rather the self. The lightning frees her potential for wholeness, which until now had been locked away in the unconscious. “This self was always present, but sleeping.” This woman’s remarkable ego development had left the self behind, and she had gotten stuck in persona adaptations and in an identification with the father complex and the animus, the “rocks” of her painting. From these identifications she needed to be freed. The possibility for contacting and becoming more connected to the self, which lies at the heart of the individuation process, must be released from the unconscious, and in this case it happens through the action of therapeutic lightning. For good reason Jung said that transference is critical for success in therapy.

Before his comments on the third picture, a crucial one in the series, Jung says in passing that “the third picture ... brings a motif that points unmistakably to alchemy and actually gave me the definitive incentive to make a thorough study of the works of the old adepts.” This is a remarkable statement in light of the fact that Jung spent a good deal of the rest of his life studying alchemy in great depth and intensity. Picture 3 depicts “an hour of birth—not of the dreamer but of the self.” The image is of a dark blue sphere floating freely in space, a “planet in the making.” This is the appearance of what the patient called her “true personality,” and she felt at the moment of making this picture that she had reached the culminating point of her life, a moment of great liberation. Jung associates this with the birth of the self and indicates that the patient is here at the point of conscious realization of the self when “the liberation has become a fact that is integrated into consciousness.”

In Picture 4 there is a significant change in the sphere. Now there is some differentiation: it is divided into “an outer membrane and an inner nucleus.” The snake that was floating above the sphere in the earlier picture is now penetrating the sphere and impregnating it. The fourth picture deals with fecundation and employs more or less explicit sexual imagery. She has put her male identification aside and is opening her being to new possibilities for life. As the patient and Jung interpret this picture, it comes to hold an impersonal meaning as well: the ego must experience “letting go” in order to expand the horizon to include positive and negative aspects of the whole personality (shadow integration). The union of snake and sphere represent a union of the psychic opposites in the patient’s psyche. Jung avoids the concrete sexual transference interpretations that could so easily be made here because they would lead into sexual reductionism and would fail to advance the individuation process. The suffering the patient was undergoing here was precisely letting go of the personalistic interpretations, namely of her sexual wishes for Jung the man, and realizing instead that she was not falling in love with her analyst, with whom she had become so psychologically intimate, but that an archetypal level of the process of individuation had been activated and this was at work beyond their personal relationship. It was the self in operation, emerging through this imagery.

The picture series now takes up in much greater depth and detail the problem of the shadow and the integration of good and evil. In Picture 5 evil is rejected, and the serpent is placed outside the sphere. Picture 6 shows an attempt to unite the opposites outside and inside, a movement towards conscious realization. Picture 7 indicates some depression and some further consciousness as a result. Picture 8, which is very important, illustrates a movement toward the earth, the mother, the feminine. This was what this woman came to Europe for; she was trying to make firm contact with the feminine side of her being. Picture 9 again shows her struggle with uniting the opposites, good and evil. In Picture 10, the opposites are balanced, but the image of cancer appears for the first time. (This women, in fact, died of cancer sixteen years later.) Picture 11 suggests that the rising importance of the outside world was beginning to cloud the value of the mandala. From here on the theme of the mandala is repeated in many variants, each one attempting further integration and expression of the self. The series concludes with Picture 19 initially, but then the woman continues for ten more years after treatment and eventually ends with Picture 24, a beautiful white lotus image with a yellow center, placed inside a golden circle that hangs against a solid black background. A single gold star sits above the lotus. The lotus itself rests on a bed of green leaves, and below the leaves are what appear to be two golden serpents. It is a gorgeous image of the self, manifest and fully realized. Jung declines to comment on the images beyond Picture 19, but they speak for themselves of a further deepening and consolidating of the selfhood uncovered and experienced during and after the period of analysis.

Jung’s concluding statement about the case is that this woman was, during her analysis, in the early stages of a powerful individuation process. During the time he saw her in analysis, she experienced the never-to-be-forgotten emergence of the self into consciousness, and in subsequent weeks and months she struggled to unite the opposites within her psychic matrix. She was able to disidentify with the animus and to reunite with the feminine core of herself. Here ego became relativized vis-a-vis the self, and she was able to experience the impersonal archetypal psyche. These are classic features of what he would call the process of individuation in the second half of life.

## The Movements of the Self

Just a final word on the subject of individuation. Jung’s view of the self is both structural and dynamic. In the previous chapter, I focused mostly on its structural features. But when one considers the process of individuation, the feature that comes to the fore is its dynamic quality. Jung thinks of the self as undergoing continual transformation during the course of a lifetime. Each of the archetypal images that appear in the developmental sequence from birth to old age—the divine infant, the hero, the puer and puella, the king and queen, the crone and the wise old man—are aspects or expressions of this single archetype. Over the course of development, the self impacts the psyche and creates changes in the individual at all levels: physical, psychological, and spiritual. The individuation process is driven by the self and carried out through the mechanism of compensation. While the ego does not generate it or control it, it may participate in this process by becoming aware of it.

At the end of his late work *Aion,* Jung presents a diagram to illustrate the dynamic movements of the self. The diagram looks like a sort of carbon atom.

!

This represents a formula for the transformation of a single entity, the self, within the context of the continuum of an individual’s psychological life. In this diagram, Jung is attempting to portray a movement within the self from pure potential to actualization: “The process depicted by our formula changes the originally unconscious totality into a conscious one.” Since it describes a continual process of transformation of one and the same substance, it is a process of transformation and renewal as well as a movement towards consciousness.

The movement starts in Quaternio A, which represents the archetypal level, the spirit end of the psychic spectrum. Here it manifests as an ideal image. As it circulates through the A quaternio, the B quaternio, the C quaternio, the D quaternio, and then returns to A to repeat again, a psychic content, an archetypal image, enters the psychic system at the archetypal end of the spectrum and an integration process ensues on each of the other three levels. First, the image rotates through the four points of the archetypal quaternio, and the idea becomes clearer. Then the idea shifts to level B, entering through the doorway of small b, by a process similar to shifting an energy level in an atom. This is a shift to another level of consciousness. Now the idea exists at the shadow level, and here it enters into reality and everyday life where objects cast shadows. The idea acquires substantiality, and the idea of unity, totality, and wholeness now must be lived out in life. The idea works its way through this psychic level, and it must now be realized concretely in space and time, and this introduces limitations and problems. Jung says that every human act can be regarded either positively or negatively  and when moving from thought to action one is entering a world of shadow potential. Every action leads to a reaction. It has an external impact, and so when someone actually begins individuating, making changes that other people start complaining about, this person is moving within the shadow quaternio. The idea is materializing, taking effect in real-life behavior, and reaching down into the instinctual level. Archetypes and instincts are becoming connected at this level, and as the idea moves into the Shadow Quaternio, it takes on more and more instinctual and embodied attributes.

When the idea descends into level C, it reaches the level of physis, which is extremely deep in the material substrate of the body, and the body itself begins to change. The organizing principle that begins with the image and entering the psyche becomes behavior, then touches on and constellates instinct, now begins to effect the body in such a way that it actually rearranges molecules. This deep physical level lies beyond the psychoid barrier of the psyche. This is one motive force behind evolution itself. Structure follows form.

With level D, the energy level itself is reached. Here lies the origin of the crystallization energy into matter. It is the submolecular and subatomic level of energy and the forms that shape it. To touch this level is to imply profound change indeed, change at the level of energy itself and its organization.

The formula presents a symbol of the self, for the self is not just a static quantity or constant form, but is also a dynamic process. In the same way, the ancients saw the imago Dei in man not as a mere imprint, as a sort of lifeless, stereotyped impression, but as an active force ... The four transformations represent a process of restoration or rejuvenation taking place, as it were, inside the self, and comparable to the carbon-nitrogen cycle in the sun, when a carbon nucleus captures four protons ... and releases them at the end of the cycle in the form of an alpha particle. The carbon nucleus itself comes out of the reaction unchanged, ‘like the Phoenix from the ashes’. The secret of existence, i.e., the existence of the atom and its components, may well consist in a continually repeated process of rejuvenation, and one comes to similar conclusions in trying to account for the numinosity of the archetypes.

Anticipating the next chapter, we can think of the self as a cosmic entity that emerges in human life and renews itself endlessly in its rotations through the psyche. Perhaps it relies on human individuals to become conscious of itself, to incarnate in the three-dimensional world of time and space, and also to rejuvenate itself and extend its existence. It subsists in the universe beyond the psyche. It uses our psyches and the material world, including our bodies, for its own purposes, and it continues after we grow old and die. We provide a home where it can emerge and reside, yet in our pride and ego inflation we take far too much credit for its genius and beauty.
