# Of Time and Eternity: Synchronicity

From his first attempts to explore the human soul and to map it and its boundaries, Jung was fascinated by what happens on the borders. This was his temperament—he loved to push at the edges of the already known. His first major study was a dissertation on mediumistic trances and the wondrous accounts of long-dead personages by his young cousin, Helene Preiswerk. This was a psychological investigation of the relation between normal and paranormal states of consciousness. Subsequent works on word association and the theory of complexes studied the boundaries between conscious and unconscious parts of the psyche. Pressing further into the territory of the unconscious, Jung found another borderland. This one lay between personal and impersonal contents of the unconscious, between the territory of the complexes and that of the archetypal image-and-instinct combinations. In his consequent investigations of the self, he found a point of transgression at the boundary between psyche and nonpsyche. Since the archetype *per se* is psychoid and does not strictly belong within the confines of the psyche’s boundaries, it bridges between inner and outer worlds and breaks down the subject-object dichotomy.

Ultimately this curiosity about boundaries led Jung to state a theory that attempts to articulate a single unified system which embraces both matter and spirit and throws a bridge between time and eternity. This is the theory of *synchronicity.* An extension of the theory of the self into cosmology, synchronicity speaks of the profound hidden order and unity among all that exists. This theory also unveils Jung the metaphysician, an identity he often denied.

## Patterns in Chaos

Jung’s few writings about synchronicity explore the meaningful order in seemingly random events. He notes—as many others have too—that psychic images and objective events are sometimes arranged in definite patterns, and this arrangement occurs by chance and not by virtue of a causal chain of preceding events. In other words, there is no causal reason for the pattern to appear. It comes about purely by chance. So the question arises: Is this chance event of patterning completely random or is it meaningful? Divination follows this idea that certain chance events have meaning. A certain bird flies overhead, and the soothsayer tells the king that the time is right to set out for battle. Or there is the more complicated case of the ancient Chinese oracle called *I Ching or The Book of Changes.* This oracle is consulted by throwing coins or yarrow stalks to determine a pattern of numbers that is then related to one of sixty-four hexagrams. By studying that hexagram, one can determine a pattern of meaning in events of the present moment and an emergent pattern that will take shape in the future. From this one can take counsel. This oracle is based on the principle of synchronicity. The assumption is that there is a meaningful order behind the chance outcome of coin tossing, a burning question, and events in the external world. People who try the *I Ching* are often surprised by its uncanny accuracy. How can one explain these meaningful arrangements and patterns that are not created by known causes?

Even closer to Jung’s analytic practice and psychological theory is a phenomenon he notes with fascination, namely that psychological compensation occurs not only in dreams but also in nonpsychologically controlled events. Sometimes compensation arrives from the outside world. A patient of Jung’s had a dream of a golden scarab beetle. While discussing this dream symbol in his study, they heard a sound at the window and found that a local Swiss version of this beetle *(Cetonia aurate)* was trying to get into the room. From instances like this, one infers that the appearance of archetypal images in dreams may coincide with other events. The compensatory phenomena cross over the commonly accepted boundaries between subject and object and manifest in the object world. Again, the puzzle for Jung was how to account for this in his theory. Strictly speaking such events are not psychological, and yet they have a deep connection to psychological life. Archetypes, he concludes, are *transgressive,* that is they are not limited to the psychic realm. In their transgressivity, they can emerge into consciousness either from within the psychic matrix or from the world about us or both at once. When both happen at the same time, it is called synchronistic.

References to the *unus mundus* (the unified cosmos) and to the notion (if not the exact term) of synchronicity are scattered throughout the *Collected Works* and in other less formal writings like letters, but Jung did not express his thoughts fully on this subject until fairly late in life. In 1952, he and the Nobel Prize-winning physicist Wolfgang Pauli jointly published *Naturerkldrung und Psyche*, (translated into English as *The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche*), which was an attempt to elucidate the possible relations between nature and psyche. It was significant that Jung published this work with a Nobel Prize-winning scientist and not with a philosopher, a theologian, or a mythologist. Of all of Jung’s theoretical work, this piece on synchronicity is subject to the most gross distortion. Jung wanted to avoid being seen as a mystic or a crank, and it is clear that he worried especially about exposing this part of his thinking to the eyes of the scientific, modern public. Pauli’s essay, “The Influence of Archetypal Ideas on the Expression of Scientific Theories of Kepler,” investigates the archetypal patterns in Kepler’s scientific thought and in a sense prepares the way for Jung’s more adventuresome contribution, the essay “Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle.” This work on synchronicity adds to Jung’s psychological theory the notion that a high degree of continuity exists between psyche and world, such that psychic images (which also include the kernels of abstract scientific thoughts, like those of Kepler) may also reveal truths about reality in the reflective mirror of human consciousness. The psyche is not something that plays itself out in human beings only and in isolation from the cosmos. There is a dimension in which psyche and world intimately interact with and reflect one another. This is Jung’s thesis.

## Developing the Idea of Synchronicity

In a letter to Carl Seelig, the Swiss author and journalist who wrote a biography of Albert Einstein, Jung writes about his first inkling of synchronicity:

Professor Einstein was my guest on several occasions at dinner ... These were very early days when Einstein was developing his first theory of relativity. He tried to instill into us the elements of it, more or less successfully. As non-mathematicians we psychiatrists had difficulty in following his argument. Even so, I understood enough to form a powerful impression of him. It was above all the simplicity and directness of his genius as a thinker that impressed me mightily and exerted a lasting influence on my own intellectual work. It was Einstein who first started me on thinking about a possible relativity of time as well as space, and their psychic conditionality. More than thirty years later this stimulus led to my relation with the physicist Professor W. Pauli and to my thesis of psychic synchronicity.

Einstein’s theory of relativity must have captured Jung’s imagination even if he did not understand the details of it or the mathematical proofs for it. It is interesting to note, too, that famous physicists played a part in this theorizing at its beginning and the conclusion. This association to modern physics gives the proper historical context for Jung’s theory of synchronicity.

The relationship between Jung and the luminaries of modern physics is a story that has yet to be told fully. In addition to Einstein and Pauli, there were also many other significant figures in modern physics who inhabited Zurich in the first half of the twentieth century and gave lectures or taught at the Polytechnic University where Jung was a professor of psychology in the 1930s. Zurich was a veritable hotbed of modern physics in the first half of this century, and it would have been nearly impossible to ignore the stimulating ferment these intellects created. There was a definite impression afoot that the nature of physical reality was being fundamentally rethought, and Jung early on—as indicated by his letter about Einstein—began thinking about the similarities between modern physics and analytical psychology. Jung’s essay on synchronicity was doubtless the result of countless discussions with these people during the thirty or more years preceding its final form and publication.

It must be recognized that the theory of archetypes and the self and the theory of synchronicity were combined to weave a single fabric of thought. This is Jung’s unified vision referred to in the Introduction of this book. To grasp the full scope of the theory of the self, one must consider it within the context of Jung’s thinking on synchronicity; to grasp his theory of synchronicity one must also know about his theory of archetypes. This is one reason why few other psychologists have followed Jung’s lead into the theory of archetypes. It becomes metapsychological to the point of metaphysics, and few psychologists feel comfortable in all the areas required to embrace this full theory—psychology, physics, and metaphysics. It is an intellectual range that few modern thinkers can hope to match. Academics are especially shy of stepping beyond the confines of their departmental specialty. The theory of synchronicity lends to Jung’s view of the self as a feature of radical transcendence over consciousness and the psyche as a whole, and it challenges the common boundarylines drawn to separate the faculties of psychology, physics, biology, philosophy, and spirituality. Psychology is traditionally supposed to limit itself to what goes on in the human mind; but with his theory of the self and synchronicity, Jung’s analytical psychology challenged this arbitrary segmentation. When Jung was once asked by students where the self ends and what its boundaries are, his reply is supposed to have been that it has no end, it is unbounded. To understand what he meant by this remark, one must realize that he was considering the implications of synchronicity for the theory of the self.

Jung was understandably ambivalent about putting forward an idea of the magnitude that synchronicity entails. Ever the cautious and conservative Swiss, Jung tried generally to rest his case on purely psychological arguments, his area of undisputed expertise. With the theory of synchronicity, however, he went out on a limb. Here the psyche by itself would not support him. Nevertheless at the age of seventy-five, he must have felt he had earned the right to indulge himself in this kind of cosmological speculation. He was ready to go into print with one of his wildest notions, the unity of the self and Being. Is this so different from saying that the self and God are one? He took the risk of sounding like a prophet, or worse yet, a crank.

## Synchronicity and Causality

The essay itself is difficult and certainly deeply flawed by a misguided effort at statistical analysis of a piece of research carried out on married couples by a colleague. In my review of this work, I will limit myself to the theoretical sections. Jung begins by commenting on the notion of causality and the laws of probability, and he notes the universal human tendency to project causality. Almost inevitably people ask the question, Why did it happen? One assumes that every event is caused by something that preceded it. Often a causal relation of this sort is present, yet occasionally it may not be. In psychology, for instance, causality is particularly difficult to ascertain because nobody can know for certain what causes us to do, think, and feel as we do. There is conscious motivation, and there is unconscious motivation of psychic contents and impulses. There are many theories that try to explain emotion and behavior causally, but our projections undoubtedly lead us to find more causation in the realm of psychological phenomena than is really there. Or we may attribute events to the wrong causes, finding out later that we were mistaken.

We might jump to the conclusion that a man beats his wife because he was beaten as a child or because he saw his father beating his mother regularly. He behaves this way because of childhood experiences, or because his parents influenced him in that direction. He “takes after his father,” or “his mother complex” is responsible, we might say with great confidence in our psychological acuity. This may be a good first approximation, but such reductive analyses surely do not exhaust the full range of possible causes and meanings. There is also a final cause, for instance, which leads people to do something in order to achieve a goal or to gain some measure of adaptation to life. Perhaps this man is trying to gain power and control over his wife, intending by that to achieve more mastery over his own future. Psychological causation can lead backwards into history or equally well forward into the future. And then there are the chance events, being in the right place at the right time. It’s hard to explain why some people are so lucky or unlucky, and we often end up praising them for the things they did not do and blaming them for the things they could not avoid. There is almost infinite space for projection and speculation.

We think in cause-and-effect terms because we are human, not because we live in a scientific age. In every period and every culture, people think causally, even if they assign causes to events that our scientific knowledge contradicts. Today we might say that someone is a psychopathic monster because he was severely abused as a child, while in the Middle Ages the view was that the Devil made him do it. Different reasons are given, but the thinking is the same. To challenge causal thinking itself, Jung recognizes, is to go against the grain of common sense. So why do it? Because there are events that cannot be covered by all the theories of causality.

In questioning the ultimacy of cause-and-effect reasoning, Jung discovered that modern physics was an ally, for physics had discovered some events and processes for which there are no causal explanations, only statistical probabilities. Jung mentions, for example, the decay of radioactive elements. There is no causal explanation for why one or another specific radium atom decomposes when it does. The decay of radioactive elements can be predicted and measured statistically, and the rate of decay is steady over time, but there is no explanation for why it happens when and as it does. It just happens. It’s a “just so” thing. This discovery of an uncaused event opens a gap in the causal universe. It is not only that science has not yet figured out how causality works here, but rather that in principle the rule of causation does not apply. If there are events that are not created by a preceding cause, how can we think about their origins? Why do they happen? What accounts for their occurrence? Are these events random and purely accidental?

Jung recognizes probability as an important factor in accounting for many events. But there are series of apparently random events that show a pattern beyond the scales of probability, such as runs of numbers or other extraordinary coincidences. Gamblers live and pray for these runs of luck that cannot be explained. Jung wants to stay away from highly intuitive or occult concepts like elective affinities or correspondences, which have been proposed by some seers and visionary philosophers such as Schopenhauer. Instead he prefers to approach this difficult subject scientifically, empirically, and rationally, just as many years earlier he had tackled the mystery of occult mediumship empirically and scientifically in his doctoral dissertation. Jung was thoroughly committed to a scientific approach to understanding.

It is tempting to read Jung’s work on synchronicity, however, in more biographical terms. In his views about individuation in the second half of life, Jung holds that people (in the Western world, at least) should try to bring their rational ego-consciousness into contact with the non-rational collective unconscious while not sacrificing the ego’s rational position. Jung also believed that the major psychological task in the second half of life is to formulate a *Weltanschauung* or worldview, a personal philosophy of life. And this should include both rational and irrational elements. In this essay on synchronicity we can see Jung using his rational Western scientific ego to explore the world of magic and the rare, inexplicable phenomena that occur in the collective unconscious. He is trying to formulate a symbol, in the form of a concept, that can hold the two realms together in a tension of opposites. While the issues he is dealing with here are similar to those often taken up in religion and philosophy, Jung is trying to bring his scientific rational method and worldview to bear upon phenomena whose mystical, religious, and quasi-magical nature usually excludes them from scientific discussion. For his own personal reasons, but also for our scientific culture as a whole, he is trying to forge a link between the two dominant cultural foci of the West, science and religion. He is trying to hold this tension without one-sidedly favoring either element. His theory of synchronicity is the symbol that will attempt to contain this pair of opposites. This is the personal piece of this work.

Jung was fascinated with J. B. Rhine’s experiments in extrasensory perception (ESP) at Duke University. He was impressed because they demonstrated, using probability theory, that ESP cannot be explained causally. The experiments showed that humans can cross the seemingly absolute boundaries that limit us to a single time-space continuum. This reminded Jung of Einstein’s theory of relativity and also of dreams he had observed where distant events were imaged during or before they took place. Rhine’s experiments offered new empirical evidence for what Jung had already concluded, namely that the psyche is not limited absolutely by the boundaries of time and space. Causality, which assumes an absolutely sealed time-and-space continuum, cannot explain these events. Jung indicates that no energy is transmitted in Rhine’s ESP experiments; there is only a “falling together” in time of thought and event. A card is turned over in one room, an image appears in a person’s psyche in another room, and these coincide more often than is statistically probable. Jung uses the term “synchronicity” in print for the first time in this essay: “it cannot be a question of cause and effect, but of a falling together in time, a kind of simultaneity. Because of this quality of simultaneity, I have picked the term ‘synchronicity’ to designate a hypothetical factor equal in rank to causality as a principle of explanation.”

## Synchronicity and Archetypal Theory

In 1954, two years after the appearance of the synchronicity essay, Jung published a revised version of his definitive theoretical paper “On the Nature of the Psyche.” In a major supplement, he links the theory of archetypes to the principle of synchronicity. This is important because it ties these two pieces of his thinking together and forms a single unified theoretical statement. Jung uses the phrase “objective psyche” to discuss the view that the unconscious is a realm of “objects” (complexes and archetypal images) as much as the surrounding world is a realm of persons and things. These inner objects impinge on consciousness in the same way that external objects do. They are not part of the ego, but they affect the ego, and the ego must relate and adapt to them. Thoughts, for instance, occur to us, they “fall into” our consciousness (in German, *Einfall,* literally something that “falls into” consciousness, but also an “inspiration”). For Jung, the intuitions and thoughts that appear from the unconscious and are not the products of deliberate efforts to think but are inner objects, bits of the unconscious that land on the surface of the ego occasionally. (Jung sometimes liked to say that thoughts are like birds: They come and nest in the trees of consciousness for a little while and then they fly away. They are forgotten and disappear.) The deeper one goes into the objective psyche, moreover, the more objective it becomes because it is less and less related to the ego’s subjectivity: “It is, at one and the same time, absolute subjectivity and universal truth, for in principle it can be shown to be present everywhere, which certainly cannot be said of conscious contents of a personalistic nature. The elusiveness, capriciousness, haziness, and uniqueness that the lay mind always associates with the idea of the psyche applies only to consciousness and not to the absolute unconscious.” Unlike consciousness, the unconscious is regular, predictable, and collective. “The qualitatively rather than quantitatively definable units with which the unconscious works, namely the archetypes, therefore have a nature that *cannot with certainty be designated as psychic”* (Jung’s italics).

In earlier chapters I noted that the archetypes are to be considered psychoid rather than purely psychic. In this passage Jung states this explicitly: “Although I have been led by purely psychological considerations to doubt the exclusively psychic nature of the archetypes, psychology sees itself obliged to revise its ‘only psychic’ assumptions in the light of the physical findings too ... The relative or partial identity of psyche and physical continuum is of the greatest importance theoretically, because it brings with it a tremendous simplification by bridging over the seeming incommensurability between the physical world and the psychic, not of course in any concrete way, but from the physical side by means of mathematical equations, and from the psychological side by means of empirically derived postulates—archetypes—whose content, if any, cannot be represented to the mind.” In other words, Jung sees large areas of identity between the deepest patterns of the psyche (archetypal images) and the processes and patterns evident in the physical world and studied by physicists. So, ironically enough, it turns out that the *participation mystique* of first stage, primitive psychology is not so far from reality after all! The psyche, defined by Jung as whatever contents or perceptions are capable in principle of becoming conscious and being affected by the will, includes ego-consciousness, complexes, archetypal images, and representations of instincts. But archetype and instinct per se are no longer psychic. They lie on a continuum with the physical world, which at its depths (as explored by modern physics) is as mysterious and “spiritual” as the psyche. Both dissolve into pure energy. This point is important because it suggests a way to conceive of how the psyche is related to soma and to the physical world. The two realms, psyche and the material world, can be bridged by mathematical equations and by “empirically derived postulates—archetypes.” Neither the material body nor the psyche need be derived from the other. They are two parallel realities, rather, that are synchronistically related and coordinated.

## Mind and Matter

The relation of mind to matter intrigued Jung endlessly. He thought it very curious for instance that, on the basis of mathematical thought alone, a bridge could be built that would stand up to the rigors of nature and human traffic. Mathematics is a pure product of the mind and appears nowhere in the natural world, yet people can sit in their studies and generate equations that will accurately predict and capture physical objects and events. Jung was impressed that a purely psychic product (a mathematical formula) could bear such a remarkable relationship to the physical world. On the other side, Jung proposes that the archetypes also serve as direct links between the psyche and the physical world: “Only when it comes to explaining psychic phenomena of a minimal degree of clarity are we driven to assume that archetypes must have a non-psychic aspect. Grounds for such a conclusion are supplied by the phenomena of synchronicity, which are associated with the activity of unconscious operators and have hitherto been regarded, or repudiated, as ‘telepathy’, etc.” Jung is generally cautious about ascribing causality to the archetypes in connection with synchronistic phenomena (otherwise he would fall back into a model of causality, with the archetypes being the causes of synchronistic events), but in this passage he does seem to connect them to “operators” that organize synchronicity.

Synchronicity is defined as a meaningful coincidence between psychic and physical events. A dream of a plane falling out of the sky is mirrored the next morning in a radio report. No known causal connection exists between the dream and the plane crash. Jung posits that such coincidences rest on organizers that generate psychic images on one side and physical events on the other. The two occur at approximately the same time, and the link between them is not causal. Anticipating his critics, Jung writes: “Skepticism should ... be leveled only at incorrect theories and not at facts which exist in their own right. No unbiased observer can deny them. Resistance to the recognition of such facts rests principally on the repugnance people feel for an allegedly supernatural faculty tacked on to the psyche, like ‘clairvoyance’. The very diverse and confusing aspects of these phenomena are, so far as I can see at present, completely explicable on the assumption of a psychically relative space-time continuum. As soon as a psychic content crosses the threshold of consciousness, the synchronistic marginal phenomena disappear, time and space resume their accustomed sway, and consciousness is once more isolated in its subjectivity.”

Synchronistic phenomena appear most often when the psyche is operating at a less conscious level, as in dreaming or musing. A state of reverie is ideal. As soon as one becomes aware and focuses on the synchronistic event, time and space categories resume their sway. Jung concluded that the subjects in the Rhine experiments must have dimmed their consciousness as they became interested and excited by the project. Had they tried using their rational egos to figure out probabilities, their ESP results would have dropped, for as soon as cognitive functioning takes over, the door closes to synchronistic phenomena. Jung points out, too, that synchronicity seems to depend greatly on the presence of affectivity, that is, sensitivity to emotional stimuli.

In his writings, Jung offers both a narrow and a broad definition of synchronicity. The narrow definition is “the simultaneous occurrence of a certain psychic state with one or more external events which appear as meaningful parallels to the momentary subjective state.” By “simultaneous” he means an occurrence in about the same time frame, within hours or days, but not necessarily at exactly the same moment. There is simply a “falling together in time” of two events, one psychic and the other physical. On the psychic side, it could be a dream image or a thought or intuition. (This mysterious correlation between psyche and the object world is the more narrow definition of synchronicity. There will be a more general definition later in this essay.)

Often synchronicity occurs, as noted above, when a person is psychically in an *abaissement du niveau mental* (a lower level of conscious awareness, a sort of dimming of consciousness) and the level of consciousness has dropped into what is today called an alpha state. This means also that the unconscious is more energized than consciousness, and complexes and archetypes are aroused into a more activated state and can push over the threshold into consciousness. It is possible that this psychic material corresponds to objective data outside the psyche.

## Absolute Knowledge

One intuitive leap that Jung makes, which is nevertheless based on a good deal of confirming evidence in his experience, is that the unconscious possesses what he calls a priori knowledge: “How could an event remote in space and time produce a corresponding psychic image when the transmission of energy necessary for this is not even thinkable? However incomprehensible it may appear, we are finally compelled to assume that there is in the unconscious something like an a priori knowledge or an ‘immediacy’ of events which lacks any causal basis.” This would allow for the possibility that intuitively we can know things that we have no rational way of knowing. Deep intuition can provide knowledge that is indeed really true and not just speculation, guesswork or fantasy. For Jung, the unconscious defies the Kantian categories of knowledge and surpasses consciousness in the range of possible knowing. In other words, in the unconscious we know many things that we do not know that we know. These could be called unthought thoughts or unconscious a priori knowledge. It is this notion that takes Jung into the furthest reaches of his speculations about the unity of psyche and world. If we know things that are beyond our conscious possibility of knowing, there is also an unknown knower in us, an aspect of the psyche that transcends the categories of time and space and is simultaneously present here and there, now and then. This would be the self.

Jungians sometimes comment that in the unconscious there are no secrets: Everybody knows everything. This is a way of talking about this level of psychic reality. Even putting aside for the moment the people who are extraordinarily gifted in intuition—like some medical intuitives who have proven an amazing rate of accuracy in diagnosis of people they have never known or seen—many people have the experience of dreaming about others in a way that gives them information to which they do not have conscious access. Of course they might not know that a particular dream is accurate. Sometimes we dream other peoples’ dreams. Sometimes other people dream our reality. As an analyst who hears a lot of transference dreams, I can verify that some of them (not by any means all) are accurate far beyond the amount of knowledge my patients consciously have about me. Once a patient’s dream even told me something about myself that I did not know consciously at the time. She dreamed that I was exhausted and needed a rest. I was not aware of this until I took time to reflect, and then coming down with a case of flu shortly thereafter, I realized that her unconscious had picked up my physical condition more accurately than even I could read with my own consciousness. One can compare this unconscious knower in people to the Eye of God, a notion that nuns formerly used to scare schoolchildren in their attempt to induce strict obedience to the church’s teaching. It is not only what you do but even what you think—in fact, it is what you *are*—that God sees and keeps a running account of. This is a projective version of the same idea that some kind of absolute knowledge exists in the unconscious.

To think about this issue of a priori knowledge further, Jung considers the psychological meaning of numbers. What are they? Suppose that we “define number psychologically as an archetype of order which has become conscious.” There are, of course, ancient views that cosmic structures of being are based on numbers and on the relations of numbers to one another. Pythagorean doctrines, for instance, taught such views. Jung takes a similar approach, only with more modern notions of mathematics as fundamental structures of psyche and world. When these basic structures of being are imaged in the psyche, they come up as circles (mandalas) and squares (quaternities) typically, to which the numbers one and four are related. The movement from one (the beginning), through the intervening numbers two and three, to the number four (completion, wholeness) symbolizes a passage from primal (but still only potential) unity to a state of actual wholeness. Numbers symbolize the structure of individuation in the psyche, and they also symbolize the creation of order in the non-psychic world. So human knowledge of numbers becomes knowledge of cosmic structure. Insofar as people have a priori knowledge of numbers, by virtue of their cognitive abilities and intelligence, they also have a priori knowledge of the cosmos. (Interestingly, ancient Greeks like Empedocles believed that the gods think in mathematical terms and that humans who were mathematical geniuses were godlike, indeed were as good as gods themselves. With this conviction, Empedocles threw himself over the top of Mt. Etna and into the active volcano below.)

If number represents the archetype of order become conscious, it still does not answer the question of *what* is ultimately responsible for this state of order. What underlies number and images of order? What is the archetype of order *per se?* There must be a dynamic force operating behind the scenes that creates the order apparent in synchronisitic phenomena and reveals itself in number and image. Jung is working his way toward a new cosmology, a statement about the principle of order not only for the psyche but also for the world. It is to be a statement that is not primarily mythological in the religious or imaginal sense, but rather one that is based on the scientific world view of modern times. This leads him to the broader definition of synchronicity.

## A New Paradigm

Toward the end of his paper, Jung introduces the far-reaching idea of including synchronicity—along with space, time, and causality—in a paradigm that can offer a complete account of reality as it is experienced by humans and measured by scientists. In one sense, what Jung is doing here is inserting the psyche into the full account of reality by saying that “the meaningful coincidence between a psychic event and an objective event” must be considered. This adds the element of meaning to the scientific paradigm, which otherwise proceeds without reference to human consciousness or to the value of meaning. Jung is proposing that a full account of reality must include the presence of the human psyche—the observer—and the element of meaning.

We have already seen in earlier chapters the tremendous importance that Jung assigned to human consciousness. In fact, he saw the meaning of human life on this planet to be tied to our capacity for consciousness, to add to the world a mirroring awareness of things and meanings that otherwise would run on through endless eons of time without being seen, thought, or recognized. For Jung, the raising into consciousness of patterns and images from the depths of the collective psychoid unconscious gives humankind its purpose in the universe, for we alone (as far as we know) are able to realize these patterns and give expression to what we realize. Put another way, God needs us in order to become held in awareness. Humans are in a position to become aware that the cosmos has an ordering principle. We can note and register the meaning that is there. But Jung also keenly wants to emphasize that he is not just trying to do speculative philosophy here. That would be traditional and old-fashioned, and would belong to a premodern level of consciousness. He is striving for Stage 5 and even Stage 6 consciousness (see chapter 8) and so is working empirically and scientifically. Synchronicity is not primarily a philosophical view, he wants to argue, but a concept based on empirical fact and observation. It can be tested in laboratories.  Only a cosmology of this sort will be acceptable in the contemporary world. Nostalgia for traditional belief systems is to be found in many quarters of our world today, but for the present and future, and for the highest levels of consciousness, the paradigm cannot be mythological. It must be scientific.

As the basis for a new world view, the concept of synchronicity and its implications work because they are easy enough to understand intuitively and to incorporate into one’s everyday life. Everyone is aware of lucky things happening, and of unlucky days when nothing seems to go right. Clusters of events that are related through meaning and image but unconnected causally can be readily experienced and verified by one and all. But to take this concept seriously as a scientific principle is not at all easy. It is revolutionary. For one thing, it requires an entirely new way of thinking about nature and history. If one is to find meaning in historical events, for example, the implication is that the underlying archetype of order is arranging history in such a way as to produce some further advance of consciousness. This does not mean progress as humans would like to think of it, but rather an advance in understanding reality. The understanding may amount to recognition of the terrible side of reality as well as the beauty and the glory of it.

This was Jung’s driving notion in writing *Aion*. Western religious and cultural history over the past two thousand years can be seen as a pattern of unfolding consciousness about an underlying archetypal structure. There are no accidents in the meandering and vicissitudes of historical process. It is going somewhere, producing a specific image that needs to be mirrored and reflected in human consciousness. There is a light side and a dark side to this image. This same mode of reflection can be applied to an individual’s life history as well as to collective history, and indeed the two can (and indeed should be) seen in relation to one another and joined in a meaningful way. Each of us is the carrier of a bit of the consciousness that is needed by the times in order to advance consciousness of the underlying motifs unfolding in history. Individual dreams of an archetypal nature, for instance, may be in the service of the times, compensating for the one-sidedness of culture, and not only of the individual’s consciousness. In this sense, the individual is a cocreator of the reflection of reality that history as a whole reveals.

The mental leaps required to think of culture and history in terms that include synchronicity are considerable, particularly for narrowly rationalistic Westerners who are committed strictly to the principle of causality. The Age of Enlightenment left a legacy of facticity without meaning. The cosmos and history, it is supposed, are arranged by chance and by the causal laws that govern matter. Jung recognizes the challenge. He was himself, after all, steeped in the Western scientific world view. “The idea of synchronicity with its inherent quality of meaning produces a picture of the world so irrepresentable as to be completely baffling. The advantage, however, of adding this concept is that it makes possible a view which includes the psychoid factor in our description and knowledge of nature—that is, an a priori meaning or ‘equivalence’.”  Jung presents a diagram that he and the physicist Wolfgang Pauli worked out.

On the vertical axis lies the space-time continuum, and on the horizontal there is the continuum between causality and synchronicity. The most complete account of reality, it is claimed here, includes understanding a phenomenon by considering four factors: where and when the event happened (the space-time continuum), and what led up to it and what it means (the causality-synchronicity continuum). If these questions can be answered, the event will be grasped in its fullness. There might be debate on any and all of these points; certainly on the question of an event’s meaning there is bound to be a great deal of difference and dispute. Interpretations are endlessly generated, especially regarding significant events like the explosion of the first atomic bomb, for example, not to mention much more personal events like the birth or death of someone in the family. There is room for widely diverging opinions here. There is also, of course, a large range of opinion about causality. Jung’s point is that the answer to the question of meaning requires more than only an account of the causal sequence of events that led up to the event in question. He argues that synchronicity must be considered in arriving at an answer to the question of meaning. From the psychological and the psychoid side of things, one has to investigate the archetypal patterns that are evident in a constellated situation, for these will provide the necessary parameters for taking up the question of synchronicity and deep structural meaning. With respect to the appearance of the atomic bomb on the stage of world history, for instance, the exploration of meaning would have to include the world constellating factor of the Second World War and the polarization of opposites which that war so violently generated. One would also have to include contemporary humankind’s dreams of the atomic bomb in the analysis. What does the atomic bomb add to one-sided human consciousness about the structures of Being?

!

In order to bring the theory of archetypes into play in relation to synchronistic events that transgress the boundaries of the psychic world, Jung was forced to expand upon his notion of the nonpsychic nature of the archetype. On the one hand, it is psychic and psychological, since it is experienced within the psyche in the form of images and ideas. On the other hand, it is irrepresentable in itself and its essence lies outside of the psyche. In this essay on synchronicity, Jung introduces the idea of the archetype’s property of *transgressivity.* “Although associated with causal processes, or ‘carried’ by them, they [the archetypes] continually go beyond their frame of reference, an infringement to which I would give the name ‘transgressivity’, because the archetypes are not found exclusively in the psychic sphere, but can occur just as much in circumstances that are not psychic (equivalence of an outward physical process with a psychic one).” The archetype transgresses both the boundaries of the psyche and of causality, although it is “carried” by both. Jung intends transgressivity to mean that the patterns which occur in the psyche are related to patterns and events that lie outside of the psyche. The feature common to both is the archetype. In the case of the atomic bomb, the archetype of the self is revealed in history inside and outside of the psyche by the event of its explosion, in and through the world historical context in which it appeared, and by millions (my guess, although there has been some research on this) of dreams that have featured the bomb.

This idea of the archetype’s transgressivity cuts in two directions. First, as I have been discussing, it affirms that there is underlying objective meaning in the coincidences that fall together in psyche and world and strike us as intuitively meaningful. On the other hand, it creates the possibility that there is meaning where we do not intuitively see it, when, for instance, accidents take place that strike us as merely due to pure chance. In both cases, this type of meaning goes beyond (transgresses) the chain of linear causality. Is our birth into a particular family only due to chance and causality, or could there be meaning here as well? Or suppose that the psyche is organized and structured not only causally, as is usually thought of in developmental psychology, but also synchronistically. This would mean that personality development takes place by moments of meaningful coincidence (synchronicity) as well as by a pre-ordained epigenetic sequence of stages. It would also imply that the instinct groups and the archetypes become wedded and activated both causally and synchronistically (meaningfully). An instinct like sexuality, for example, might become activated not only because of a causal chain of sequential events (genetic factors, psychological fixations, or early childhood experiences) but also because an archetypal field is constellated at a particular moment and a chance encounter with a person turns into a lifelong relationship. In this moment, something of the psychoid world becomes visible and conscious (the *syzygy,* the soul mate pair). The constellated image of the archetype does not create the event, but the correspondence between inner psychological preparedness (which may be totally unconscious at the time) and the outer appearance of a person, inexplicably and unpredictably, is synchronistic. Why such connections take place seems a mystery if we reflect only upon causality, but if we introduce the synchronistic factor and the dimension of meaning we come closer to a more complete and satisfying answer. In a random universe, this falling together of need and opportunity, or desire and satisfaction, would be impossible, or at least statistically improbable. These unforgettable mysteries that are embodied in synchronistic events transform people. Lives are turned in new directions, and contemplation of what lies behind synchronistic events leads consciousness to profound, perhaps even to ultimate levels of reality. When an archetypal field is constellated and the pattern emerges synchronistically within the psyche and the objective non-psychic world, one has the experience of being in Tao. And what becomes available to consciousness through such experiences is foundational, a vision into as much of ultimate reality as humans are capable of realizing. Falling into the archetypal world of synchronistic events feels like living in the will of God.

## Cosmology

The essay on synchronicity begins with and indeed focuses mostly on what Jung calls the “narrow definition” of synchronicity, that is, the meaningful coincidence between a psychic event such as a dream or thought and an event in the non-psychic world. But Jung also considers the broader definition. This has to do with acausal orderedness in the world without special reference to the human psyche. This is a “wider conception of synchronicity as an ‘acausal orderedness’” in the world. This becomes Jung’s cosmological statement. Synchronicity, or “acausal orderedness,” is a principle underlying cosmic law. “Into this category come all ‘acts of creation’, a priori factors such as the properties of natural numbers, the discontinuities of modern physics, etc. Consequently we would have to include constant and experimentally reproducible phenomena within the scope of our expanded concept, though this does not seem to accord with the nature of the phenomena included in synchronicity narrowly understood.” From the viewpoint of the general principle of synchronicity, our human experience of acausal orderedness, through the psychoid factor and the transgressivity of the archetype, is a special case of much broader orderedness in the universe.

With this cosmological picture I place the finishing touch on Jung’s map of the soul. His explorations of the psyche and its borders led him into territory that is normally occupied by cosmologists, philosophers, and theologians. His map of the soul must however be placed within the context of this wider perspective, for this is what provides the most extensive reach of his unified vision. We human beings, he teaches, have a special role to play in the universe. Our consciousness is capable of reflecting the cosmos and bringing it into the mirror of consciousness. We can come to realize that we live in a universe which can best be described using four principles: indestructible energy, the space-time continuum, causality, and synchronicity. Jung diagrams this relationship as shown below.

The human psyche and our personal psychology participate in the order of this universe most profoundly through the psychoid level of the unconscious. Through the process of psychization, patterns of order in the universe become available to consciousness and eventually can be understood and integrated. Each person can witness the Creator and creative works from within, so to speak, by paying attention to image and synchronicity. For the archetype is not only the pattern of the psyche, but it also reflects the actual basic structure of the universe. “As above, so below,” spake the ancient sages. “As within, so without,” responds the modern soul explorer, Carl Gustav Jung.

!
