# How to Write about Methods

## The Structure and Content of the Methods Section

The readers’ acceptance of those results and conclusions is linked to **their acceptance of the method**. If there is little or no information about the method in the rest of the paper, this may affect the overall credibility of the study, particularly if the amount of supplementary material discourages reading.

In whatever form it appears in the future, the Methods section is likely to retain its primary function: to contain enough detailed information to ensure that other researchers can **replicate** the work done and obtain similar results.

## Building a Model

questions:

1. What are some common ways to start the Methods section? 
2. What is normally in the Methods section, and in what order? 
3. What are some common ways to end the Methods section?

As with the Introduction, you are not describing or summarising *what the sentence is saying* (the **content** of the sentence); instead, you are working out *what the sentence is doing* (the **function** of the sentence).

One way to find out what the writer is doing in a sentence is to look at the **tense** of the main verb. What is that verb tense normally used for? Is the verb in the same tense as in the previous sentence? If not, why has the writer changed the tense?

Some writers begin immediately by describing the method, or the materials, or the source of the materials. This is appropriate where the research focus and/or the journal readership is **narrow** and those who are likely to read the research article are **familiar** with this type of method. If this is not the case, it is more reader-friendly to start with some introductory material.

One way to introduce the method is to start with a **general statement** about what was done and/or used, and then break it down to produce the details. This is more reader-friendly than beginning with highly specific details which the reader must put together to construct a coherent understanding of the method.

Here are three common ways to introduce the Methods:

- Offer a **general overview** by outlining the parameters of the work, for example the number of tests, the materials/equipment and perhaps the purpose of the investigation.
- Provide information about the source of the materials/equipment or background information such as the properties, characteristics of the materials/equipment.
- Refer back to something in the previous section, such as the aim of the project or the problem you are addressing.