# Science Research Writing

## Preface to the Second Edition

> Student: Dr Einstein, aren’t these the same questions as in last year’s exam?
> Dr Einstein: Yes, but this year the answers are different.

Science research writing is changing and developing, influenced by factors that are driving the way that science is communicated and the way that research is accessed. These factors include the **global nature** of science research, **internet reading** and the **accelerating speed** of scientific discovery, all of which are revolutionising the communication models that existed in the twentieth century.

The global nature of science research requires **fast**, **effective** and **accurate** communication that can be understood by all participants in international interactions and research collaborations. The language of science is not owned by English speakers but by its many users worldwide. Researchers who are not native English speakers frequently lead their field. These researchers report their work in high-impact journals and need to write and read research in their discipline fast and effectively. This is creating a global science communication language that codifies[^1] research such that it can be accessed by all users, in all countries, and at all levels.

**Internet reading** is another factor changing the way research is accessed, and this in turn is influencing how it is written. The collaborative nature of STEMM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics and Medicine) and increases in research funding have increased the volume of research published annually and therefore the amount of reading required for successful STEMM research. In the past, researchers would read hard copies of a limited, carefully-curated set of print journals. Now, however, most achieve a faster and more fluid access to a wider range of research on the internet via information-surfing. Research activity involves extensive title-scrolling to search for relevant studies, and readers may only read one section of the research article — perhaps the Abstract, Results or Conclusion. As a result, **titles** have become more important, and parts of the research article, particularly the **Abstract** or **Summary**, are developing in ways that enable them to be read as **independent**, **standalone** documents.

A third factor driving the change in science research communication is the need for **speed**. Science is moving forward almost faster than it can be reported, and STEMM research requires writers to communicate highly complex information as quickly as possible. In some cases this is to avoid being ‘leapfrogged’[^3] by other researchers; in others it is because links with industry, patents and spin-off companies demand fast publication. If a paper takes too long to write, there is a risk that it will be partially or completely out of date — and therefore unpublishable — by the time it is submitted. Scientists and journal editors therefore need to communicate the impact of a study as quickly and simply as possible, and this, too, is shaping STEMM research writing.

There are also changes in the nature of research itself: science is becoming more specialised in some cases, and more **interdisciplinary** in others. This creates a complex communication structure in which highly specialised information sometimes needs to be accessed by **non-specialists**.

All of these changes are having a profound effect on research writing, with impacts on both the structure and the content of the traditional research article. The form of the research article is in transition, changing to satisfy the fast-moving needs of the research community. The function and content of the Abstract is changing, the location of the Methods section is shifting, the IMRD (Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion) structure is loosening, and markers of significance such as Research in Context panels, one-page summaries and lists of Highlights are sometimes included, particularly in the online version of the research article. To participate successfully in the current research environment, researchers need to be aware of — and respond to — these changes and developments in science research writing. They also need to be prepared for those that are coming. This has resulted in two key changes in the Second Edition of this book.

### Changes in This Second Edition

The first change reflects the fact that science communication platforms are in transition. In the First Edition, research articles in high-impact journals across a wide range of disciplines were analysed to generate what was then a set of fairly stable writing models for each section of the research article. Those writing models have been significantly updated in this Second Edition to reflect current patterns and trends in research writing, but they can no longer be seen as stable representations. Researchers now need to develop the ability to update their writing models alongside the next round of changes and developments in science communication. Given the fast-moving nature of the changes outlined above, the Second Edition aims to develop writing strategies that are future-proof and which represent a lifelong tool, irrespective of upcoming changes and developments in science communication.

The Second Edition develops these strategies by encouraging writers to use a **reverse-engineering** approach to writing. Most reading involves passively approaching a text as a source of information. By contrast, reverse engineering a text requires an active reading strategy that involves learning to step back from the information itself and become aware of how that information is delivered. Once developed, reverse engineering can be used by STEMM research writers as a starting point to generate all text types in science research communication now and in the future, including grant proposals, conference abstracts, Letters, technical reports and review articles.

The approach is similar to that of Painting by Numbers, whose marketing slogan was *A beautiful oil painting the first time you try*. Using a Painting by Numbers kit may not turn you into Leonardo da Vinci, but it delivers a strategy for producing recognisably similar paintings.

In the same way, analysing the organisational scaffold, writing patterns and language in a set of well-written research articles will deliver a strategy for producing a credible[^2], well-organised and readable research article that conforms to the current conventions of comparable articles.

The second major change in the Second Edition is the title, and therefore the readership, of the book. The First Edition was directed towards non-native speakers of English. However, my experience of working with native speaker researchers since then clearly demonstrates that although there are some language issues that are specific to non-native speakers, the writing issues are common to all STEMM research writers. The aim of all researchers is to create successful and effective text out of data and information. Given the complexity of most STEMM research projects, this requires a high level of communicative competence. However, ‘**academic English is no-one’s first language**’, and native speaker researchers, even those at the highest level, experience most of the same challenges as non-native speakers when writing about their research. Experience has shown me that correct English grammar does not guarantee a successful text, and that the reverse is also true: a text may be well-written and therefore communicate successfully and accurately despite some language errors. I have therefore shifted the focus of the book to language and writing issues that are common to both native and non-native STEMM researchers, and particularly to those issues which have an impact on meaning and readability.

Since the First Edition was published in 2009, Science Research Writing has been translated into Chinese, Japanese and Korean, and is used around the world at universities and research institutes, by instructors teaching English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Specific Academic Purposes (ESAP) to STEMM researchers and students, as well as by STEMM researchers who are native speakers of English. These users of the book have contributed to many of the changes in the Second Edition, including the addition of a **Checklist and Tips** chapter that summarises the writing issues dealt with in other Units.

[^1]: codify：**VERB**编纂;整理;将(法规等)整理成典<br/>If you **codify** a set of rules, you define them or present them in a clear and ordered way.

[^2]: credible：**ADJ-GRADED**可信的;可靠的<br/>**Credible** means able to be trusted or believed.

[^3]: leapfrog：跳背，跨越<br/>to jump over someone or something by placing your hands on their back and spreading your legs wide apart