# A White Paper on Neural Network Quantization

While neural networks have advanced the frontiers in many applications, they often come at a high computational cost. Reducing the power and latency of neural network inference is key if we want to integrate modern networks into edge devices with strict power and compute requirements. Neural network quantization is one of the most effective ways of achieving these savings but the additional noise it induces can lead to accuracy degradation. 

In this white paper, we introduce state-of-the-art algorithms for mitigating the impact of quantization noise on the network’s performance while maintaining low-bit weights and activations. We start with a hardware motivated introduction to quantization and then consider two main classes of algorithms: Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) and Quantization-Aware-Training (QAT). PTQ requires no re-training or labelled data and is thus a lightweight push-button approach to quantization. In most cases, PTQ is sufficient for achieving 8-bit quantization with close to floating-point accuracy. QAT requires fine-tuning and access to labeled training data but enables lower bit quantization with competitive results. For both solutions, we provide tested pipelines based on existing literature and extensive experimentation that lead to state-of-the-art performance for common deep learning models and tasks.

## Introduction

With the rise in popularity of deep learning as a general-purpose tool to inject intelligence into electronic devices, the necessity for small, low-latency and energy efficient neural networks solutions has increased. Today neural networks can be found in many electronic devices and services, from smartphones, smart glasses and home appliances, to drones, robots and self-driving cars. These devices are typically subject to strict time restrictions on the execution of neural networks or stringent power requirements for long-duration performance.

One of the most impactful ways to decrease the computational time and energy consumption of neural networks is quantization. In neural network quantization, the weights and activation tensors are stored in lower bit precision than the 16 or 32-bit precision they are usually trained in. When moving from 32 to 8 bits, the memory overhead of storing tensors decreases by a factor of 4 while the computational cost for matrix multiplication reduces quadratically by a factor of 16. Neural networks have been shown to be robust to quantization, meaning they can be quantized to lower bit-widths with a relatively small impact on the network’s accuracy. Besides, neural network quantization can often be applied along with other common methods for neural network optimization, such as neural architecture search, compression and pruning. It is an essential step in the model efficiency pipeline for any practical use-case of deep learning. However, neural network quantization is not free. Low bit-width quantization introduces noise to the network that can lead to a drop in accuracy. While some networks are robust to this noise, other networks require extra work to exploit the benefits of quantization.