# Reachability Analysis of Deep Neural Networks with Provable Guarantees

<center>Wenjie Ruan, Xiaowei Huang, Marta Kwiatkowska</center>

Verifying correctness of deep neural networks (DNNs) is challenging. We study a generic reachability problem for feed-forward DNNs which, for a given set of inputs to the network and a Lipschitz-continuous function over its outputs, computes the lower and upper bound on the function values. Because the network and the function are Lipschitz continuous, all values in the interval between the lower and upper bound are reachable. We show how to obtain the safety verification problem, the output range analysis problem and a robustness measure by instantiating the reachability problem. We present a novel algorithm based on adaptive nested optimisation to solve the reachability problem. The technique has been implemented and evaluated on a range of DNNs, demonstrating its efficiency, scalability and ability to handle a broader class of networks than state-of-the-art verification approaches.

## Introduction

Concerns have been raised about the suitability of deep neural networks (DNNs), or systems with DNN components, for deployment in safety-critical applications, see e.g., [Amodei et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2018]. To ease this concern and gain users’ trust, DNNs need to be certified similarly to systems such as airplanes and automobiles. In this paper, we propose to study a generic reachability problem which, for a given DNN, an input subspace and a function over the outputs of the network, computes the upper and lower bounds over the values of the function. The function is generic, with the only requirement that it is Lipschitz continuous. We argue that this problem is fundamental for certification of DNNs, as it can be instantiated into several key correctness problems, including adversarial example generation [Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014], safety verification [Huang et al., 2017; Katz et al., 2017; Ruan et al., 2018b], output range analysis [Lomuscio and Maganti, 2017; Dutta et al., 2017], and robustness comparison.

To certify a system, a certification approach needs to provide not only a result but also a guarantee over the result, such as the error bounds. Existing approaches for analysing DNNs with a guarantee work by either reducing the problem to a constraint satisfaction problem that can be solved by MILP [Lomuscio and Maganti, 2017; Cheng et al., 2017; Bunel et al., 2017; Xiang et al., 2017], SAT [Narodytska et al., 2017] or SMT [Katz et al., 2017; Bunel et al., 2017] techniques, or applying search algorithms over discretised vector spaces [Huang et al., 2017; Wicker et al., 2018]. Even though they are able to achieve guarantees, they suffer from two major weaknesses. Firstly, their subjects of study are restricted. More specifically, they can only work with layers conducting linear transformations (such as convolutional and fully-connected layers) and simple non-linear transformations (such as ReLU), and cannot work with other important layers, such as the sigmoid, max pooling and softmax layers that are widely used in state-of-the-art networks. Secondly, the scalability of the constraint-based approaches is significantly limited by both the capability of the solvers and the size of the network, and they can only work with networks with a few hundreds of hidden neurons. However, state-of-the-art networks usually have millions, or even billions, of hidden neurons.