# Survive ==Adversity==

Certain pain and trouble are almost necessities of life. And the unfortunate can be found everywhere while people being worth of envy are pretty rare. So what we can do is to accept the life that we are living, do not trouble ourselves and try to make it more interesting and richer. Maybe then we will come across our “a-ha”moment.

The interconnectedness of all things: Physicists now confirm it. Nothing that happens is an isolated event. It only appears to be. **The more we judge and label it, the more we isolate it**.

The wholeness of life becomes fragmented through our thinking. Yet the totality of life has brought this event about. It is part of the web of interconnectedness that is the ==cosmos==. This means whatever is could not be otherwise.

In most cases, we cannot begin to understand what role a seemingly ==senseless== event may have within the totality of the cosmos, but recognizing its inevitability within the vastness of the whole can be the beginning of an inner acceptance of what is, and thus a realignment with the wholeness of life.

---

…

---

**Chronic physical pain is one of the harshest teachers you can have. “Resistance is futile” is its teaching**. Nothing could be more normal than an unwillingness to suffer. Yet, if you can let go of that unwillingness, and instead allow the pain to be there, you may notice a subtle inner separation from the pain, a space between you and the pain, as it were. This means to suffer consciously, willingly. When you suffer consciously, physical pain can quickly burn up the ego in you, since ego consists largely of resistance. The same is true of extreme physical disability.