# You Are the Motivity of All Good Fortune

Let inner light leads us to become better.

The mind is incessantly looking not only for food for thought; it is looking for food for its identity, its sense of self. This is how the ego comes into existence and continuously re-creates itself.

---

When you think or speak about yourself, when you say, “I”, what you usually refer to is “me and my story”. This is the “I” of your likes and dislikes, fears and desires, the “I” that is never satisfied for long. It is a mind-made sense of who you are, conditioned by the past and seeking to find its fulfillment in the future.

Can you see that this “I” is ==fleeting==, a temporary formation, like a wave pattern on the surface of the water?

Who is it that sees this? Who is it that is “aware”of the fleetingness of your physical and psychological form? I am. This is the deeper “I” that has nothing to do with past and future.

---

…

---

Do you carry feelings of guilt about something you did—or failed to do—in the past? This much is certain: you acted according to your level of consciousness or rather unconsciousness at that time. If you had been more aware, more conscious, you would have acted differently.

Guilt is another attempt by the ego to create an identity, a sense of self. To the ego, it doesn’t matter whether that self is positive or negative. What you did or failed to do was a manifestation of unconsciousness–human unconsciousness. The ego, however, personalizes it and says, “I did that”, and so you carry a mental image of yourself as “bad”.

---

If you set egoic goals for the purpose of freeing yourself, enhancing yourself or your sense of importance, even if you achieve them, they will not satisfy you.

**Set goals, but know that the arriving is not all that important**. When anything arises out of presence, it means this moment is not a means to an end: the doing is fulfilling in itself every moment. You are no longer reducing the Now to a means to an end, which is the egoic consciousness.

---

“No self, no problem.” said the Buddhist master when asked to explain the deeper meaning of Buddhism.