# The Secret of Making All Wishes Come True

The Buddha once said that life only exists at the present moment. Past has been gone and future has not come yet, so it is the present that we only live for.

On the surface it seems that the present moment is only one of many, many moments. Each day of your life appears to consist of thousands of moments where different things happen. Yet if you look more deeply, is there not only one moment, ever? Is life ever not “this moment?”

从表面上看，当下只是无数片刻中的一个，人生中的每一天都由无数个片刻组成，每个时刻都发生了不同的事情。然而，如果你能观察得更深入一些，难道不是只有一个片刻吗？难道生命不总是此刻吗？

This one moment— Now—is the only thing you can never escape from. The one constant factor in your life. No matter what happens. No matter how much your life changes, one thing is certain: it’s always Now.

Since there is no escape from the Now, why not welcome it, become friendly with it?

---

When you make friends with the present moment, you feel at home no matter where you are. When you don’t feel at home in the now, no matter where you go, you will carry unease with you.

The present moment is as it is, Always. Can you let it be?

---

…

---

Thoughts, emotions, sense perceptions, and whatever you experience make up the content of your life. “My life” is what you derive your sense of self from, and “my life” is content, or so you believe.

You continuously overlook the most obvious fact: your innermost sense of “I Am” has nothing to do with what “happens” in your life, nothing to do with content. That sense of “I Am” is one with the Now. It always remains the same. In childhood and old age, in health or sickness, in success or failure, the “I Am”—the space of Now—remains unchanged at its deepest level. It usually gets confused with content, and so you experience “I Am” or the Now only faintly and indirectly, through the content of your life. In other words: your sense of Being becomes obscured by circumstances, your stream of thinking, and the many things of this world. The Now becomes obscured by time.

And so you forget your rootedness in Being, your divine reality, and lose yourself in the world. Confusion, anger, depression, violence, and conflict arise when humans forget who they are.

Yet how easy it is to remember the truth and thus return home:

I am not my thoughts, emotions, sense perceptions, and experiences. I am not the content of my life. I am Life. I am the space in which all things happen. I am consciousness. I am the Now. I Am.