# Do One Thing at a Time

Doing one thing at a time means being totally committed to the thing that you are doing and completely concentrating on it.

Whenever you are able, have a “look” inside yourself to see whether you are unconsciously creating conflict between the inner and the outer, between your external circumstances at that moment—where you are, who you are with, or what you are doing—and your thoughts and feelings. Can you feel how painful it is to internally stand in opposition to what “is”?

When you recognize this, you also realize that you are now free to give up this futile conflict, this inner state of war.

---

How often each day, if you were to verbalize your inner reality at that moment, would you have to say, “I don’t want to be where I am?” What does it feel like when you don't want to be where you are—the traffic jam, your place of work, the airport lounge,the people you are with?

It is true, of course, that some places are good places to walk out of—and sometimes that may well be the most appropriate thing for you to do. In many other cases, however, walking out is not an option. In all those cases, the “I don’t want to be here” is not only useless but also dysfunctional. It makes you and others unhappy.

It has been said: wherever you go, there you are. In other words: you are here. Always. Is it so hard to accept that?

---

Do you really need to mentally label every sense perception and experience? Do you really need to have a reactive like/dislike relationship with life where you are in almost continuous conflict with situations and people? Or is that just a deep-seated mental habit that can be broken? Not by doing anything, but by allowing this moment to be as it is.

---

…

---

Whatever you accept completely will take you to peace, including the acceptance that you cannot accept, that you are in resistance.

---

Leave Life alone. Let it be.