# Hell or Heaven

Your way of being is one of the best presents that you can give to the people around you.

How quick we are to form an opinion of a person, to come to a conclusion about them. It is satisfying to the egoic mind to label another human being, to give them a conceptual identity, to pronounce righteous judgment upon them.

Every human being has been conditioned to think and behave in certain ways—conditioned genetically as well as by their childhood experiences and their cultural environment. That is not who they are, but that is who they appear to be.

When you pronounce judgment upon someone, you confuse those conditioned mind patterns with who they are. To do that is in itself a deeply conditioned and unconscious pattern. You give them a conceptual identity, and that false identity becomes a prison not only for the other person but also for yourself.

To let go of judgment does not mean that you don’t see what they do. It means that you recognize their behavior as a form of conditioning, and you see it and accept it as that. You don’t construct an identity out of it for that person.

That liberates you as well as the other person from identification with conditioning, with form,with mind. The ego then no longer runs your relationships.

---

…

---

Whenever you meet anyone, no matter how briefly, do you acknowledge their being by giving them your full attention, or are you reducing them to a means to an end, a mere function or role? What is the quality of your relationship with the cashier at the supermarket, the parking attendant, the repair man, the “customer”?

A moment of attention is enough. As you look at them or listen to them, there is an alert stillness—perhaps only two or three seconds. Perhaps longer. That is enough for something more real to emerge than the roles we usually play and identify with.

All roles are part of the conditioned consciousness that is the human mind. That which emerges through the act of attention is the unconditioned—who you are in your essence underneath your name and form. You are no longer acting out a script. You become real. When that dimension emerges from within you, it also draws it forth from within the other person.

Ultimately, of course, there is no other and you are always meeting yourself.